                       Georgia Department of Natural Resources
                                 Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch
                                    4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354
                                              Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232
                                                                                FAX: 404/675-6247
To:             Coosa-North Georgia Water Planning Council
From:           Becky Champion, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD
                Rick Brownlow, CH2M HILL
Subject:        Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 9 on February 23, 2011
Welcome and Introductions
Chairman John Bennett welcomed the group to the meeting and introduced John Weaver, Mayor
of Jasper and Robert Jones, Pickens County Commission Chairman, to welcome the group to the
meeting. They both discussed the importance of the council’s work and encouraged the group to
make the final push towards adoption later this year.
Overview
Rick Brownlow gave an overview of where the Council is in the schedule and highlighted that
much of the meeting would be spent getting feedback on the plans and discussing the future of
the council and the 319 grant subcommittees.
"Council Future" Subcommittee Report/Discussion with Regional Commissions (RCs)
Rick introduced Vice-chairman David Ashburn to report on the committee discussion on the
future of the council. He provided the following recommendations from the committee:
    •   Align water planning with the RC boundaries and that the RCs play a role in leading
        implementation and future planning efforts
    •   Utilize the RC staff to provide support for implementation (may need local technical
        group to provide support)
    •   Develop a fee, similar to the approach for the Metro District, to help fund the RCs for
        implementation support.
    •   Recommend to the state that the councils be given legislative authority
He then discussed that they would like to redraw council boundaries to match the RC boundaries.
However, if that recommendation was not taken, then they would use the two RCs that are in the
CNG Region (Northwest Georgia RC and Georgia Mountains RC) to support the council. The
reasoning is that they already have staff and infrastructure to do planning, although maybe not
quite enough staff. He explained that the staff had participated in discussions with both RCs and
that they agreed to provide whatever support they could. Danny Lewis, Georgia Mountains RC
                                                                                                 1
 Executive Director and Bill Steiner, Northwest Georgia RC Executive Director addressed the
council. Bill recognized that the Northwest Georgia Regional Water Resources Partnership is a
successful model and that they have worked with them to help bring federal funding to support
them. He then discussed that DCA is cutting their funding for the next fiscal year (starting July
2011). However, he did agree that they would do what they could to support implementation of
the water plan.
There was a question about how the Metro District is organized and funded. Rick Brownlow
mentioned that it is staffed by the Atlanta Regional Commission, but there is a contract between
the Metro District and the ARC for staffing support. They had a per capita dues assessment that
has varied over the years, depending on the level of planning taking place in that particular year.
Mark Marlowe stressed that it is going to be important to identify a method for implementing the
plan, so it doesn’t just sit on a shelf. Mike Berg mentioned that the RC is going to provide base
services, primarily education, and beyond that, there would need to be additional funding for
specific planning efforts.
Is the RC&D dynamics going to change? The legislative authority we’re asking for is just
expanding their ability on water planning for regional reservoirs or wells, especially to get
funding. Concern was mentioned about the enforcement component. Mr. Brownlow clarified
that the State Water Plan is clear that EPD has enforcement responsibility.
The council observed how this is similar to the regional transportation plan and how the RCs
offered to help and it made sense to do that. He recommends that for water planning support,
this should be done using legislation. Also mentioned that they have regional plans they prepare
and have environmental components. A motion was made to adopt the committee
recommendations, seconded, and approved without opposition.
David then clarified that any legislation will be in the 2012 session, due to the timing issues with
the General Assembly.
319 Grant Subcommittee Recommendation
David then summarized and discussed the 319 subcommittee actions and recommendations.
They received two projects from the Partnership, but were hoping they would also have an
opportunity to be funded through the competitive process. Then they identified a couple extra
projects. However, the partnership projects were not funded competitively, so he would like
those two projects be the first two for consideration and then Habersham and Limestone Valley
projects. He recommended that the council approve the recommendations of the subcommittee
and that the partnership work with EPD to finalize the workplans.
The motion was made to adopt the recommendations, seconded, and approved without
opposition.
Council Discussion on Development of Water Development and Conservation Plan
Mr. Brownlow then introduced that the rest of the meeting will cover the latest version of the
plan, have some group discussions, and vote to recommend the plan (with any minor
corrections).
The group discussed whether having breakout sessions would be helpful and agreed to review
the draft plan in a single full council session.
                                                                                                    2
 Mr. Brownlow went through some slides that detailed specific changes to this version of the
plan, both in Sections 1-5, as well as Section 6, 7, and 8. Chairman Bennett wanted to walk
through each section at a time.
Section 1 discussion: mostly typographical changes.
Section 2 discussion: Carters Lake is not in Whitfield County.
A comment was made about the lack of information related to agriculture water use by county.
Mr. Baughman clarified that Section 3 identifies current agriculture use for the region. Then the
future uses are in Section 4. There was a comment that we shouldn’t just refer to other websites.
There was a comment that we need forecasts for non-crop irrigation water use. That should be
included as a recommendation to the state in Section 7-9. There was further discussion on the
accuracy of the agricultural forecasts, even the crop demand.
A comment was made that the resource assessment used the agricultural demand, not the
permitted amount. That could be a flaw that needs to be addressed in the future. However, the
starting point of the demand forecasts is so underestimated, that the future modeling is missing a
large quantity of the agricultural demand. It was reiterated that running the model using
permitted capacities would allow for a level of safety and would also allow for an extra check on
the resource limitations. Chairman Bennett then reiterated concern that agricultural permits
could be so large, that it may get in the way of municipal and industrial permitting, because they
have all the capacity. He agreed with the need to include a recommendation to the state in the
plan for getting and using better agriculture water use and forecast numbers. In addition, we
need measurement of existing use, especially those using under 100,000 gallons per day. Ms.
Champion mentioned that agriculture water use has been an issue for all councils, and really goes
back to the EPD rules and regulations that set up agriculture water use with the current
framework. She recognized the need for better information. There is an observation that
irrigation is the biggest user in the state, but in our council, we have many other non-crop
agriculture uses that need to be recognized. Kenneth said these small users of non-crop
agriculture, including “locally grown” trends are going to drive the water use to a significant
amount. Vice chairman David Ashburn mentioned that our council did have conference calls to
discuss this non-permitted agriculture issue last year. He agreed that a “worst-case scenario”
should be run.
Mr. Brownlow summarized the two recommendations: 1. Section 7 recommendation to the state
for better accounting of non-crop agriculture use, 2. Fix the footnote on Table 4-4, that zeros just
mean “information not available”. It was also mentioned that in the intro of Section 4, we should
insert a qualifying statement on the accuracy of ALL of the projections, including the population
and water demands. Lee Mulkey said they should make the connection between industrial
poultry processing and non-crop poultry livestock growth. He wants that correlation drawn.
Irwin stated that he wants a sentence in Section 4.3 saying the council tried to fix the numbers,
but it was not done.
Section 3 discussion: It was suggested that the council insert a note in 3.2.3 about the “no issues
were identified” be applied to current conditions only. It was also suggested to remove
discussion of HCP in Section 3 and just move it to the “review of other plans” section.
                                                                                                    3
 Section 4 discussion: Add a note on Table 4-1 that it does not include 2010 census. It was
mentioned that we need a note about transient population and how that may change. Add a note
in Table 4-2 that it does not include publicly supplied industries. Various comments noted in
plan, as well as a comment needed in the energy section to address future water needs for energy
uses.
Section 5 discussion: Why is there no figure for the Crystalline rock aquifer like Figure 5-1?
Perhaps delete Figure 5-1. Also add a note at the end of Section 5-1 about the yield limitations,
not that there is “adequate supply”. Also some footnotes are needed on Figure 5-4 to explain that
the 2050 line includes reduced point discharge limits on Phosphorus of 1.0 mg/L. Table 5-4
explain why Dawson and Union have flows greater than their current permit as a note.
Section 6 discussion: Table 6-1, would like to edit WC-4 and WC-6 to remove requirements.
Add “consider” to WC-4. Edit the title of WC-6 to include “residential and urban irrigation”.
Edit WC-12 to remove “infiltration”. Edit WS-3 to add “or local entities” to work with GAEPD.
Edit WS-8, second bullet to be “recommend adoption of”. Add “Consider” to WW-2 and WW-
5. Edit WQ-8 to add “and stream restoration” to title.
Section 7 discussion: The council made some specific suggestions for 7.1.1 on page 7-2. WC-3
– Agriculture Permits, check language to match SB 370. Be consistent with “consider” and
“encourage” terminology. Question about “qualified local government” terminology used in
WQ-10. Section 7.3, page 7-37 there was some discussion on the Tennessee River and the role of
regional reservoirs.
Discussion by Mike Berg of the legislation currently in consideration related to public-private-
partnerships. He is supportive of the bill, with its current language.
General discussion of reservoir benefits to downstream flows during low flow times and for
assimilative capacity.
Add policy/programmatic recommendation to the state in Table 7-9 about evaluating Aquifer-
Storage and Recovery (ASR).
There was a motion to make the changes noted and go to public comment, there was a second,
and the motion passed unanimously.
Elected Official and Public Comments
Comment: If there is a public meeting, please make sure that the notice is published in the local
organ, and paid for to be sure it is paid.
Wrap Up/Council Meeting Evaluation
The formal public comment period will be 45 days after the plans are uploaded on May 9, 2011
to the GA EPD website. Michelle mentioned that other councils are meeting with local
governments to show them the plan and answer questions.
The council discussed holding the next meeting in or around Blue Ridge in late July timeframe.
The meeting was adjourned at 2:55 p.m.
                                                                                                  4
             Coosa – North Georgia Water Planning Council, February 23, 2011 CM#9
Members Present                                   17. Tom O’Bryant
1. David Ashburn                                  18. Lamar Paris
2. Irwin Bagwell                                  19. Sam Payne
3. Kenneth Beasley                                20. Todd Pealock
4. John Bennett                                   21. Frank Riley
5. Mike Berg                                      22. Denise Wood (on behalf of David
6. Tim Bowden                                         Pennington)
7. Keith Coffey (alternate)
8. Kelly Cornwell                                 Members Not Present:
9. Pat Gober                                      1. Doug Anderton
10. Jerry Jennings                                2. Charlie Bethel
11. Haynes Johnson (alternate)                    3. Katie Dempsey (ex officio)
12. Anne Kaiser                                   4. Stephen Gray
13. Sherry Loudermilk                             5. Dick Martin
14. Mark Marlowe (on behalf of Don Cope)          6. Chip Pearson (ex officio)
15. Tim Mercier                                   7. Jimmy Petty
16. Lee Mulkey (on behalf of Gerald               8. David Westmoreland
    Dunham)
Elected Officials
    1. Robert Jones, Pickens County
    2. John Weaver, City of Jasper
Partnering & Other State Agencies
    1. John Damer, GA DNR
    2. Lydia Doyle, Department of Community Affairs (http://www.dca.state.ga.us/)
    3. John Loughridge, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission
GA Environmental Protection Division
    1. Becky Champion, Assistant Branch Chief for Coosa-Tallapoosa-Tennessee Basins
    2. Michelle Vincent
CH2M HILL
    1. Doug Baughman
    2. Rick Brownlow
    3. Brian Skeens
                                                                                      5
 