                      Georgia Department of Natural Resources
                                Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch
                                  4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354
                                            Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232
                                                                            FAX: 404/675-6247
                                      November 19, 2010
MEMORANDUM
TO:            Council Members
FROM:          David Ashley, Tai-Yi Su, and Clay Zielinski
               JJG Jacobs
SUBJECT:       Council Meeting 8 Summary
               Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council
CC:            Kevin Farrell, Ted Hendrickx, GA EPD
               Charlotte Weber, JJG/Jacobs
Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan
Middle Ocmulgee Regional Water Plan
Meeting Date:         November 4, 2010
Location:             Macon Water Authority, Amerson Water Treatment Facility
1) Welcome and Introduction
Council Chairman Richardson welcomed the group. Chairman Richardson thanked everyone for
their participation and Tony Rojas for the use of the Amerson Water Treatment Facility.
Chairman Richardson also recognized Council member Gator Hodges for being included in
Georgia Trend Magazine’s “40 Under 40” listing.
2) Technical Subcommittee Update
Chairman Richardson stated that since Council Meeting 7, the technical subcommittee has been
working very hard through meetings and conference calls to review the management practices
and draft plan sections. Chairman Richardson recognized all subcommittee members by name,
and asked subcommittee members Russell Adams and Mark Wyzalek to give a summary of the
work that is being done. The Chairman also asked that Vice Chair Ben Copeland give a brief
update on the Joint Council Meeting held October 6th in Macon.
Russell Adams explained that the technical subcommittee has held three conference calls since
the previous Council meeting. Almost immediately after the Council had ranked the initial list of
                                                                                         Meeting Summary
                                                        Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                       November 19, 2010
management practices, EPD published “Detailed Guidance for Managing Demand (water
conservation guidance) with specific guidance on regional selection of water conservation goals
and practices. A conference call was held on September 29th to discuss this document, and the
subcommittee requested additional time to review the water conservation guidance.
On October 7th, a second conference call was held to review tiered conservation practices by
sector. During this call, the conservation goals and practices were discussed and revised based
on the guidance provided by EPD. Representatives from municipal, industrial, and agricultural
water sectors spoke as to which practices were most appropriate for the Middle Ocmulgee
Region and these practices were documented by the planning contractor. A supplemental
document (technical memorandum) to the regional plan will document the suite of practices
recommended by the Council.
A third conference call was held on October 13th to review sections 6 and 7 of the draft regional
water plan. An implementation schedule for the management practices was included in Section
7. This schedule was a surprise to the subcommittee as EPD was requiring specific dates for
initial, short-term and long-term implementation of management practices based on the EPD
template. The subcommittee asked not to assign time frames to practices that may or may not
apply and recommended that there be no schedule for voluntary practices. Accordingly, Section
7 was revised by the planning contractor and submitted to EPD on October 15th. Chairman
Richardson expressed concern that guidance is being given by EPD after decisions have been
made, and this caused extra time and work. He also noted that the Council is working through
these issues and meeting deadlines.
Vice Chair Copeland spoke on the Joint Council Meeting held on October 6th. He noted that the
meeting was informative with several discussion panels, but didn’t seem to be a “working”
session. Several other Councils have gaps and jointly owned gaps between regions that will
require coordination. One such region is southwest Georgia (Lower Flint Region) where
agriculture use is very large and there is a significant gap. However, the panel members
mentioned that even when all agricultural withdrawals were eliminated, it would only cover
approximately half of the predicted gap. Copeland stated that the “take- away” from the Joint
Meeting is that the Middle Ocmulgee Region is in fairly good shape.
Chairman Richardson agreed that Middle Ocmulgee Region is fortunate to be in good shape.
The only perceived gap that will really need to be addressed is in dealing with wastewater (water
quality).
One Council member asked how many changes we are getting from EPD, and how much more
work is required to deal with these changes. Chairman Richardson responded that it is not very
significant, mostly restructuring and rewording and that all Councils will need to use similar
language and structure.
Ashley provided an overview of what would be discussed in this Council meeting. The
statewide energy forecast was just received and will be introduced. The submittal of sections 6
and 7, addressing how to meet potential gaps, will be reviewed. There needs to be a discussion
on where the Council goes beyond the initial 3-year appointment (term to expire February 2012).
                                                2 
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                         November 19, 2010
Section 8, dealing with how to evaluate progress (benchmarking) will be discussed. Finally,
Charlotte Weber will discuss additional outreach moving forward.
3) Statewide Energy Forecast
Tai-Yi Su gave a presentation on the Energy Forecast which has just been completed and was
received on October 29th. EPD established an ad hoc group that was comprised of major power
companies in the state in order to help with data collection and to give technical guidance. The
base year for this forecast is 2005 in order to be consistent with municipal and industrial
forecasting. The analysis was statewide and only contains regional information through 2017.
There are a total of 16 thermoelectric facilities in Georgia withdrawing a total of over 2.7 billion
gallons per day. Only 7% of this withdrawal is consumptive loss (approximately 187 million
gallons per day (MGD)), and the rate of consumption for facilities depend on their respective
processes. This list is comprised of thermoelectric facilities only, as hydroelectric withdrawals
are not consumptive. Su pointed out Plant Scherer on a map showing all existing facilities and
commented that while Georgia Power operated Plant Scherer, 4 to 5 companies have joint
ownership of the plant. Thomas Wicker commented that Georgia Power owns less than 50% of
Plant Scherer. Su reviewed the different power generation processes and stated that the trend is
for more recirculated cooling water processes in the future (which withdraw less water than
once-through cooling, but consume a higher percentage). The primary reason for switching to
cooling towers is to eliminate the heat load that once-through cooling introduces to streams.
One Council member asked how much water power plants lose (consumptive use). Su noted that
it depended on the plant, but that Plant Scherer withdraws approximately 60 MGD and returns
about 25 MGD. This loss is through cooling, and does not include evaporation over Lake
Juliette.
In order to forecast water demand, an average withdrawal (and consumption) quantity in gallons
per Megawatt-hour was calculated to get an average withdrawal (and consumption) factor for
each process. Those calculations were reviewed and found to be consistent with national studies.
From here, baseline and alternative scenarios were forecasted with the alternative being a high
growth scenario. These scenarios relied heavily on the population projections provided by the
Office of Planning and Budget.
Council members Ham and Peters asked about the accuracy of the projection. Su noted that
there are too many variables to give a definite level of accuracy beyond what is planned through
2017 (there is available permit data and a level of comfort as to what plants are coming on and
going off line through 2017). The bottom line is that these projections are based on the best
available data and reasonable assumptions.
Ham asked if Georgia Power has any reluctance using the population data. Wicker stated that all
power companies were involved in putting this together and all use the same data, so they feel as
comfortable as they can. With power, it depends on where these people move to, and looking
beyond 2017 becomes increasingly harder to do.
                                                   3 
 
                                                                                            Meeting Summary
                                                           Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                          November 19, 2010
Rojas stated that there are locations that are better suited for power generation (proximity to gas
mains, transmission centers), and asked if the state should be looking in those locations for water
availability. Su commented that power generation facilities are usually located near population
centers or future growth centers, and that some assumptions need to be made regionally as to the
impact on water resources.
Robert Dickey added that no major power plants have been built over the past 25 years or so, but
that will change as capacities at these facilities are reached. Thomas added that the types of
plants and regulations will need to be looked at as well when discussing the location of future
plants and their impact on water.
Su stated that from 2021 through 2050, an addition of 1,000 megawatts is predicted to be needed
annually. Ham asked what the increase has been over the past three years. Su pointed out from
the graph that it looks pretty consistent with the 1,000 megawatt per year number. Ham asked
how much of this additional power generation will be used for Georgia versus the southeastern
region in general. Thomas noted that the vast majority stays in Georgia.
Wicker also discussed that power facility planning must be done based on peak loading (the
hottest days of the year when energy demand is highest) rather than average demand. Chairman
Richardson commented that the same is done for municipal water demand. Wyzalek asked how
much of the projected increase is for base load and how much is for peak loading. Su
commented that the data is not that specific. We can contact the planning contractor who
developed the forecast to see how they included base and peak loading data.
Su spoke about renewable energy in Georgia. For the forecast, only 1% of power needs are
assumed to be met by non-biomass and non-hydro by 2030. Current trends indicate that biomass
is the only potentially significant renewable energy in Georgia. She then went on to talk about
overall withdrawal and consumption projections through 2050. In addition to current facilities
and currently planned facilities (based on air permit applications at EPD) through 2020, the 2050
forecast includes an unassigned consumptive use ranging from 170 MGD (baseline additional
capacity scenario) to 189 MGD (alternative additional capacity scenario). Because there is no
geographic information available beyond 2020, the 170 MGD forecasted consumptive use
(baseline scenario) is statewide and no locations have been assigned in the forecast.
Ham asked when the numbers will be assigned. Su noted that if the Council had additional
information or would like to request future modeling runs with additional demand for power
generation, they could do so.
Wicker spoke to the way Georgia Power plans. There is a process under the Public Service
Commission (PSC) that every 3 years an integrated public resource plan is developed to estimate
future energy needs for the state. This plan is reviewed by the PSC for approval. When working
on these plans, a 10-year planning horizon is used. In the certification process they must submit
requests for proposals for anyone who wishes to build, and there is a right for independent
producers to come in. This process has been in place since the 1970’s and has worked well to
meet the growing needs of the state. The last plan has just been finished, so the next plan may
provide an opportunity to update the forecast and the plan.
                                                  4 
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                         November 19, 2010
Whitten asked if anyone is doing research on nuclear power plants, and how that could change
water needs. Wicker stated that there are currently 2 nuclear plants (Vogtle and Hatch), and that
Plant Vogtle has been approved for 2 additional units that will add around 2,000 megawatts of
additional capacity. Because of the lead time of construction, those additions won’t begin
operation until 2016 and 2017. There is typically a long lead time from approval to operation, so
while all alternatives are being looked at, forecasting beyond 2017 is not possible.
Su again stated that the Council can request additional model runs for new scenarios (adding
additional power production) to evaluate potential gaps. The potential issue with asking for
these theoretical scenarios is that the results may not come back in time for the January plan
submittal. The other option is to use the known 2020 values and update the next water plan with
newer energy water forecast in five years. The planning contractor feels reasonably comfortable
that there will not be an additional gap for the range of 2020 consumptive use under either
baseline or alternative scenarios.
Ham asked about the water needs of the municipal, industrial, and agriculture sectors, how much
excess regional water is available. Chairman Richardson stated that if we put all of the demand
information together it doesn’t look like there are any gaps. Copeland added that Dr. Kennedy is
revising the groundwater (Cretaceous aquifer) model and whether there is a gap depends on what
the revised yield would be. Ashley stated that while the surface water availability model allows
us to view potential gaps, it does not give a picture of total water available in a given region.
The only way to test how much water is available is to run different modeling scenarios with
higher demand. Farrell added that direct impacts on surface water flow are more of a concern if
the withdrawal is coming from a river rather than a reservoir. For example, Plant Scherer takes
water from Lake Juliette, so there is not much impact on low flows of the Ocmulgee River. The
Council can recommend that future consumptive use would have to come from storage rather
than on-stream.
3) Review of the Regional Plan
a) Major EPD Comments
Ashley discussed the review comments from EPD. The planning contractor is working on
revising sections 1-5. The major EPD comments for Sections 1-5 were to coordinate with major
stakeholders and governments and get public outreach comments, as well as to strengthen the
linkages between the management practices and the Council’s vision and goals (not just to use
the practices to fill gaps).
For sections 6-7, a draft was submitted on October 15th. The subcommittee did a lot of work and
Ashley thanked the committee. The major comments received from EPD included:
    • Adoptability: The regional water plans needs to follow the process of various planning
        guidance issued by EPD;
    • Gaps need to be filled or addressed;
    • Use stronger language where gaps were identified and include management practices to
        address the gaps;
                                                  5 
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                         November 19, 2010
    •   More geographic specificity (such as north or south of Fall Line, county or sub-
        watershed) and more explanations and clarity on management practices;
    •   An implementation schedule/timeline needs to be included; and,
    •   Prioritization of management practices and recommendations to the State.
b) Discussion on Gaps and Sections 6 and 7
Ashley commented that there are several supplemental documents available, and that many of
these documents provide county-specific information that is being used for planning. He asked
for everyone to please continue to review information for their respective county and provide
feedback when necessary.
Rojas asked if the plan looked at gaps for specific counties and municipalities, and if not, then
where the gaps are. Ashley responded for surface water availability resource assessment, there
are no gaps at planning nodes in or below the Middle Ocmulgee Region. For groundwater, there
may be a gap, but it is spread across the state and is not specific to any region. Also, Dr.
Kennedy is in the process of revising the groundwater model and it looks as though more water
may be available.
The Surface Water Quality Resource Assessment does show that there are potential assimilative
capacity gaps, particularly in area south of the Fall Line. However, these are model results based
on full permitted load conditions and 2050 flow projections, and are not “real world” discharge
conditions, so assessments of streams in these areas may be needed in order to determine if
treatment capacity or level needs to be upgraded. Additionally, as the Region grows some rural
counties will continue to rely on septic systems, and management practices will likely be needed
for operation and maintenance of septic tanks.
Ashley discussed addressing potential water quality gaps; specifically, the potential need to add
physical capacity in some areas and higher levels of treatment in others. Actual modeling results
are not facility-specific, but more on the level of knowing that certain areas may have potential
assimilative capacity or nutrient issues. More monitoring may be needed to get actual water
quality condition data before investing in higher levels of wastewater treatment. There is a need
for local level master plans in both water and wastewater areas, but particularly in wastewater
where there are potential gaps. More detailed and specific local plans will assist in making good
decisions on how to manage gaps at the local level.
Rojas asked about the slide shown by Ashley - that while there are dates for capacity needs, there
are no dates on treatment upgrades. Su stated that the treatment gaps were for 2050, and that
capacity shortfalls begin around 2020 and 2030 for some counties. The timeline was estimated
to show the relative urgency of predicted capacity shortfalls.
Copeland asked if the results for Peach County take into account the upgrades in Ft. Valley, and
the fact that the Macon Water Authority will soon be serving northern Peach County. Su stated
that the map showing the results is meant to show when planning needs to occur, and also that
there may be some existing plans (along the lines of the changes in Peach County) that EPD is
unaware of, and therefore were not included in the model assumptions. Local entities are
                                                  6 
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                         November 19, 2010
encouraged to evaluate what’s happening locally and make sure that EPD is made aware of any
decisions so that these results can be as accurate as possible.
Rojas asked if the wastewater treatment gaps were mainly due to problems areas north of the
region. Ashley stated that he did not believe that was the case, because the gaps were south of
Lake Jackson, where flow is regulated. Rojas then asked how there would not have gaps
currently and what causes the future gaps. Su commented that the modeling is based on
projected population growth, and that the water quality assessment is based on estimated 2050
loadings, so that if all modeling predictions were to occur during critical conditions (when
streams are lower due to droughts or increased withdrawals) this could have negative effects on
water quality.
Ashley also noted that non-point source pollution is an issue, so management practices will be
needed to address this. He showed a slide of impaired water and estimated stream miles of
assessed conditions based on various water quality parameters (biota, DO, fecal coliform, etc.)
Ashley discussed master planning guidance for wastewater as well as monitoring guidance. For
monitoring, Ashley reiterated that the results shown are from model predictions and not real data.
The way to find out what actually needs to be done is to do monitoring and develop better data.
Monitoring also helps to determine if the management practices and guidelines in watershed
protection plans are working.
Rojas commented that the 5-year recommendation for master plan updates may be too frequent
in areas with no growth. He suggested the interval be revised to every 5-10 years depending on
conditions and development levels. Ham asked where funding for these master plans would be
coming from. Ashley stated that it would be from local governments.
Wyzalek stated that EPD had been doing plans on a 5-year cycle, and that part of that was
monitoring, modeling and giving results on water quality. He asked if there was any thought of
EPD starting that back up. Kevin stated that the basin management plans had been a one-time
effort, and had been replaced by the regional water planning process. He noted that the state will
continue to spend $1-2 million annually on monitoring.
Ashley reviewed water quantity and quality issues for the region and potential management
practices to address these issues. He also reviewed the background of the “Detailed Guidance
for Managing Demand” and stated that there will be a DNR Board rule-making process by June
2011 regarding SB370 (Water Stewardship Act) and State Water Plan.
Seleb asked whether the watershed water quality monitoring that is being done on a local basis
(required by EPD for plant upgrade or expansion), as well as new regulations are going to be put
in any kind of unified database. Ferrell commented that EPD receives data in many ways and
formats, and is working on organizing these data so they will be available on their website for
communities to enter data and view data from all areas.
Rojas asked about long term water quality monitoring and wastewater master planning and why
they needed to be moved up in priority. Ashley noted that the latest results from the Water
                                                  7 
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                         November 19, 2010
Quality Resource Assessment were not available when the initial list of management practices
was ranked in Council Meeting 7; they were ranked lower in priority by the Council at the last
meeting. We have better understanding of the implications of the resource assessment now and
recommend that the Council consider moving these two water quality practices up in priority.
Ashley discussed Section 7.1 (Table 7-1 Implementation Steps) and Section 7.4
(Recommendations to the State). These two sub-sections have been submitted as drafts to EPD.
Rojas commented that the demand management tiers make sense for management practices, but
implementation timelines will be different for different areas or entities; so we shouldn’t include
the same dates for every management practice. He commented that time is not the driving factor,
rather criteria and conditions. Certain practices may be required based on the conditions that
exist in any given area. He suggested that this be considered by all Councils and for all regional
plans throughout the state.
Ashley commented that the technical subcommittee raised the same concerns. In the first draft
for committee review, the planning contractor included timelines associated with initial,
intermediate, and long-term implementation actions. The subcommittee commented on the
language of Table 7-1 and the timeline was taken out when submitted to EPD. EPD has come
back and said there needs to be some sort of time frame for implementation. A major job this
Council now has is to come back and look at how to implement timelines in a meaningful way.
Wyzalek asked if there was a specific requirement that we show a schedule. He commented that
the Council may have to put it in the plan, but perhaps it could be addressed in different ways for
different management practices. Ashley confirmed that there was language in the State Water
Plan and in the Planning Guidance to include implementation schedules. Rojas expressed the
need for guidance from EPD or the planning contractor to help to explain that conditions affect
the time requirements and that the timelines should be flexible based on those conditions.
Su stated that we have been trying really hard to work within the 40-page limit constraints,
which have recently been softened by EPD. This may give an opportunity to provide additional
explanation or specificity on certain conditions and how management practices will be
implemented. The planning contractor will be working in this direction and try to tie
management practices to conditions.
Chairman Richardson noted that funds were available in GEFA but a substantial portion was
taken out with the securitization of loans. Funding is a difficult issue, and the GEFA board is
trying to address this now.
Wyzalek asked what the logic is behind the recommending additional monitoring and studies at
Lake Jackson but not for downstream areas. Ashley responded that Lake Jackson nutrient issue
is a multi-regional issue involving a number of local governments and planning districts (Middle
Ocmulgee and Metro District), it is best handled at a state level. Su added that EPD’s goal is to
have watershed models for all watersheds in the state, and the reason Lake Jackson made the list
is because the resource assessment showed a potential nutrient (nitrogen) loading issue in Lake
Jackson and in the watershed above Lake Jackson. The Council can recommend other areas of
the region for additional monitoring and modeling.
                                                 8 
 
                                                                                          Meeting Summary
                                                         Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                        November 19, 2010
Ham asked that if the Council is making decision on long term funding, can it recommend the
state be required to pay for all funding. Chairman Richardson mentioned that there are loans
available through GEFA, but Ham specifically asked about grants because these are waters of the
state. Ashley asked for written suggestions from the Council on how to deal with funding.
4) Section 8 – Monitoring and Reporting Progress
Ashley discussed benchmarking as required in the Regional Water Plan planning guidance.
Benchmarks are defined as specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and time-phased methods
of measuring progress toward goals.
Ashley stated that the Council’s current 3-year term ends in February 2012 and that there are no
provisions in the State-wide Water Management Plan for interim activity or responsibilities (after
June 30, 2011). The Councils may recommend how they would operate between plan updates.
EPD may reconvene water Council leadership after the election to form recommendations to the
Governor/Lt. Governor/Speaker of the House.
Chairman Richardson stated that the planning contractor has been contracted to provide
consulting support to the Council only through June of 2011, and asked where the resources
would come from to keep things rolling beyond that time. He expressed the need to recommend
funds additional State funding for EPD in order to carry out this process, and that the
recommendation needs to be put in the plan.
Farrell mentioned that other Councils are also talking about different ways to organize beyond
the June 30, 2011 contract. The door is open as to how the Councils may operate. The
expectation is for the Council to recommend a Regional Water Plan to EPD, and that going
forward if the Plan is updated or amended, the new Plan would also be recommendations from
the Council. How to accomplish this has not been laid out, and no money has been set aside.
Ashley discussed several organization and funding examples, including the Metro North Georgia
Water Planning District model, South Carolina 208 Water Quality Management Plan model, a
non-profit organization model, as well as an alternative inter-governmental agreement model.
He mentioned that both the Savannah-Upper Ogeechee and Coosa North Georgia Councils have
discussed creating a permanent body. The Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Council had discussed
forming a permanent basin-wide body that would also include counties in South Carolina in the
Savannah River basin. There are actually interests (existing regional organizations) competing
to lead the Coosa - North Georgia Council.
Briley asked if there was any thought toward this being the beginnings of water management
districts as is the case in Florida, as well as when recommendations are needed to be provided
from the Council. Ashley expressed that no one is advocating for the water management district
model. Florida’s water management districts are legislatively controlled and collect taxes and
issue permits in coordination with the state Department of Environmental Protection. Currently,
there is no vision for our Councils to morph into that kind of body. As to when
recommendations are needed, the planning contractor will have a draft of the complete report to
                                                 9 
 
                                                                                            Meeting Summary
                                                           Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                          November 19, 2010
Council by next month, so any suggestions over the next few weeks would be helpful.
Briley suggested the Council discuss options now, and suggested asking local governments to
ask Regional Commissions to be facilitators. Adriane Wood (Department of Community
Affairs) commented that this Council’s boundary crosses three regional commissioners, and the
water Council boundaries are not the same as regional commissions. Chairman Richardson
suggested intergovernmental agreements between the Middle Ocmulgee counties and funding
through GEFA to provide a facilitator and hold meetings. The Council could establish a budget
and meet periodically to review the progress of the plan until it is time for the update.
Ham commented that if the Council went that route, funding would be necessary and agreed with
using GEFA to meet that need. Chairman Richardson explained the four types of GEFA funding
sources and thought that money would probably need to be requested from the Georgia Fund.
Briley commented that using Regional Commissions may be an easier way to go. There were
discussions that this could be an issue of unfunded mandates and that the way to get in front of
that would be to begin now asking EPD to help local governments put in place regulations to
make developers help pay for the plan.
Chairman Richardson commented that the potential problem of using Regional Commissions is
the overlap as stated earlier. He suggested another route, namely to ask the Legislature to make
continuing appropriations to take the Council beyond the June 30th deadline, and again
recommended that funding could possibly come through GEFA.
Ashley continued going through various benchmarking examples. Ham suggested considering
adding sites for additional reservoirs as a measurement tool. Ashley asked the Council to send
any other suggestions of benchmarks to the planning contractor. Farrell asked if there is nothing
negative heard about a benchmark, is it likely that they will appear in the plan? Ashley
confirmed that it probably would and noted that there is still brainstorming occurring on this
section.
Ashley discussed Section 7.2 of the plan, and how cost implications may be addressed for
management practices. Because of the low level of detail in the plans, costs are likely to be
given in unit costs such as dollars per capita or dollars per gallon rather than in total costs.
Ashley reviewed the supplemental document list to show the Council what technical work has
been completed and to let Council members know that it will be available to everyone. Su
commented that some of these documents have been sent to the Council members as pre-meeting
materials and asked Council members to continue to review the data and let us know of possible
changes, errors or omissions.
Ashley discussed the proposed Plan completion and future meeting schedule as summarized
below:
           • Subcommittee Meetings in November
           • Complete Draft Plan for Council Review - Dec 8, 2010
           • Council Meeting 9 (mid-December)
                                                  10 
 
                                                                                          Meeting Summary
                                                         Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                        November 19, 2010
            •   Subcommittee Meetings in January as needed
            •   Council Meeting 10 (mid-January)
            •   Final Draft to EPD – January 31, 2011
            •   Public Comment Begins – February 7, 2011 (45 days)
            •   Plan Revision – March to June 2011
            •   Council Meeting (May or June) as needed
            •   Plan Adoption – on or before June 30, 2011
The Council decided to hold the next Council meeting on Monday, December 13th. There will
be a subcommittee meeting coming up soon, and notice will be sent to all Council members.
(Note that this meeting has since been scheduled for November 18th.)
5) Public Outreach
Weber discussed public outreach efforts that have been completed to date. All meetings have
been open to the public with public notices being posted through the website and through emails.
The regional water plan website contains information dealing with meeting materials and
meeting minutes. Meeting notices have been sent to local governments contact lists provided to
us via Georgia Municipal Association (GMA) and Association County Commissioners of
Georgia (ACCG). Ashley has twice presented information at local civic organizations such as
rotary clubs, as have Chairman Richardson and Council member McSwain. Several planning
conferences have included water plan representatives. Press releases have also been made to get
the word out. The planning contractor has contacted many utilities directly for water use surveys
and to get feedback on demand forecasts.
Weber presented the idea of creating invitations to editors of media outlets to attend the
December or January meetings. She suggested that a letter be sent by Chairman Richardson
personally asking media outlets to attend could be helpful. Chairman Richardson suggested
including members of radio and TV stations as well. Weber asked that Council members add
names to the current media list if they know of any, as we need to personally invite them.
Other outreach ideas discussed included presenting the water plan at local events and functions
and to get schools involved. March 22nd is World Water Day, which would be a good day to
promote the plan if possible.
Wood suggested adding an insert into water bills. Rojas suggested adding information in local
newsletters - perhaps Georgia Power’s. He also suggested that local elected officials who work
with GMA and ACCG to put notices on the web and into newsletters. Chairman Richardson
suggested giving a summary or a one-page press release to counties and local governments to put
on their websites.
Wicker noted that the Georgia Economic Development Association should know what is going
on for all of the Councils, and suggested inviting members of the association to future Council
meetings. Weber asked for any other suggestions to be submitted to her as soon as possible so
they can be added to the list of possible opportunities.
                                                 11 
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                         November 19, 2010
6) Elected Official and Public Comments: None.
7) Wrap Up
Chairman Richardson stated that this was a very productive meeting, a lot of ground was
covered, and that there is still a long way to go over the next 2 months. The technical
subcommittee is looking to hold 1-2 meetings over the next month. These meetings are open to
anyone on the Council, and notice will be given for all subcommittee meetings. Participation
and suggestions are welcome and helpful. Chairman Richardson thanked Rojas again for the use
of the Amerson Water Treatment Facility for the meeting. Meeting adjourned at 2 pm.
Summary of Action Items
1. Check with CDM (EPD’s consultant for energy forecast) over peaking/baseload data
assumptions for energy forecasts.
2. Confirm that no action is needed for for additional future modeling run requests for the
unassigned energy water demands.
3. Outreach to public and local governments - council members to provide list of media reps for
contact, local elected officials to work with GMA and ACCG to put notices in their newsletters
and on websites, PC to prepare 1-page summary document/press release to be provided to local
governments to use on their websites, radio, media etc. by end of November.
Meeting Attendees
Council Members in attendance
Russ Adams                                           Paul Leath
Jason Briley                                         Larry McSwain
Blair Cleveland                                      Hal Newberry
Ben Copeland Jr.                                     Barry Peters
Robert Dickey                                        Robert Ray
Richard Haddock                                      Elmo Richardson
Jim Ham                                              Tony Rojas
Charlie Harris                                       William Whitten
Gator Hodges                                         Thomas Wicker
William Lazenby
 
Council Members not in attendance
Tony Bass
John Bembry
Keith Dalton
Jerry Davis
Bobby Hamby
Jay Matthews
Harvey Norris
                                                 12 
 
                                                                                            Meeting Summary
                                                           Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                          November 19, 2010
Eva Persons
Terry Scarborough
 
Staff in attendance
Kevin Farrell (EPD)
Ted Hendrickx (EPD)
David Ashley (Jacobs JJG)
Tai-Yi Su (Jacobs JJG)
Charlotte Weber (Jacobs JJG)
Clay Zielinski (Jacobs JJG)
Technical Sub-Committee in attendance
Mark Wyzalek (Macon Water Authority)
Mike Hopkins (Newton County Water and Sewerage Authority)
Marianne Golmitz (City of Warner Robin)
Marcie Seleb (Butts County Water and Sewerage Authority)
  Partnering Agencies and General Public
Greg Popham (Forsyth City Manager)
*Adriane Wood (Department of Community Affairs - DCA)
*Jimmy Evans (Georgia DNR Wildlife Resources)
*Frank Green (Georgia Forestry Commission)
*Bill Stembridge (Regional Representative for Senator Saxby Chambliss)
*Skip Langley (Regional Representative for Senator Johnny Isakson)
*Kristi Harpst (Middle Georgia Regional Commission)
Lorraine Campagne (Woodard and Curran)
*Indicates attendee represented a partnering agency 
                                                  13 
 
 