                        Georgia Department of Natural Resources
                                   Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch
                                      4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354
                                                Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232
                                                                                  FAX: 404/675-6247
                                           December 23, 2010
DRAFT MEMORANDUM
TO:             SUO Council Members
FROM:           Jeff Larson, GA EPD
                Bill Martello, Jacobs
SUBJECT:        Council Meeting #8 Summary
                Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council (Council)
Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan
Regional Water Planning
Council Meeting 8 Summary
Meeting Date:           December 14, 2010
Location:               The Thomson Depot, Thomson, Georgia
Attendees:              See attached list
1) Welcome and Introduction, General Topics
Ron Cross, Council Chairman, welcomed everyone to the meeting and thanked them for attending.
Council members, EPD staff, planning contractor (PC), partnering agencies, and other attendees
introduced themselves.
Chairman Cross discussed that the EPD Director had allowed a 90-day extension to all planning councils.
It was suggested that the councils use this time for additional public outreach efforts. In particular,
outreach to newly elected mayors and county commissioners.
Chairman Cross asked about the regulatory aspects of the Regional Water Plan (Plan). Mr. Bill Martello
(Planning Contractor for the SUO Council) responded that the draft Plan included an implementation
schedule and benchmarks for priority management practices, which included updates to local water and
wastewater master plans, and that these could be used in permitting. Mr. Jeff Larson (EPD) responded
that the Plan would be used as a guide for permitting. Mr. Martello suggested that EPD consider setting
future performance goals and let local water resources plans outline their approach to implementing the
management practices for meeting these goals. The Council discussed how the Plan may affect water
 utility permitting and questioned how EPD would use the management practices in the Plan in a
regulatory context. The Plan was discussed as a document to help guide local water and wastewater
master planning.
Chairman Cross discussed the new Water Stewardship Act and that in his community the outdoor
watering schedules contained in the Act would not allow them to continue with their previously
successful odd/even outdoor watering ordinance. He believes that his community had finally found
something that all the residences were following and the change in legislation would likely have a
negative effect on something he believed was working well. Ms. Deatre Denion (Department of
Community Affairs) responded that the new legislation was promoted by the green industry in an effort to
expand conservation programs beyond outdoor irrigation and that they endorsed the provisions of the Act.
Chairman Cross asked if the Council would like to develop a future organization to monitor
implementation progress of the Plan and continue with regional planning efforts. Mr. Larson advised
that there has been no official plan for the Council to continue beyond the current term. However, the
Council could decide to develop a future organization. Chairman Cross suggested that there be a group
for the Savannah River basin including parties from Georgia and South Carolina. Chairman Cross stated
his desire for the development of a Savannah River basin coalition. He is planning on contacting all
bordering governments in Georgia and South Carolina to form a permanent group. His thoughts were that
the group would begin as a public sector entity with county commission chairs and mayors. They would
then decide if they wanted to add other potential stakeholders.
Q: How is this Plan going to affect future utilities coming into the region (specifically power utilities)?
Chairman Cross responded that similar to the old way of determining future water availability but the
Plan would be used as a starting point. The thermoelectric facility in the region, Plant Vogtle, will double
its water use in the next 10 years. EPD incorporated water withdrawals associated with Plant Vogtle into
the future water use projections.
Mr. Martello commented that grant money is available through the 319 program with $100,000
designated for each planning council (application deadline January 31, 2011). The grant money must be
matched with 40% local funding (60% grant). EPD suggested that projects proposed to be partially
funded through the 319 program be included with the Plan. Ms. Denion pointed out local governments
could use in-kind services for the funding match. Sam Booker (public) suggested the local adopt-a-
stream programs promoted by EPD. He stated that if a county already had a program, the current budget
could be used as the matching fund for the grant. Mr. Martello stated that interested members could
contact Chris Faulkner (EPD 319 coordinator) at 404.675.1628 and an EPD prepared handout was
provided to the Council.
The Council discussed revising the goal that restricts interbasin transfers. Chairman Cross recommended
no interbasin transfers out of the Savannah River for supporting economic growth of communities outside
the river basin, especially to the detriment of communities within the basin. The available water should
be used to continue meeting future basin needs. It was pointed out that interbasin transfers already exist
with those near Greenville, South Carolina, from Lake Keowee (owned by Duke Power). Also, a
proposed biomass electric generation plant in Warren County (in the Ogeechee River Basin) plans to use
reclaimed water from the City of Thomson (Savannah River Basin) for cooling purposes. Chairman
 Cross talked about how we could discourage interbasin transfers from the Savannah River. Mr. Martello
noted that there is a Public Notice on an EPD proposed rule change regarding interbasin transfers with a
DNR board public hearing scheduled for Jan 5th, 2011. Chairman Cross mentioned that some believed
that the language of the proposed rule should be changed from “should” to “shall” to make the statements
more mandatory. Mr. Larry Walker suggested that the Council send a letter and include comments on
interbasin transfer. Mr. Pat Goran brought up that the Council had already said they were adamantly
against interbasin transfer. Chairman Cross said that the Plan’s language would need to be reworked
concerning interbasin transfer for adoptability of the Plan. The Plan still could show that the Council is
against interbasin transfer, but the Council would not be allowed to ban it entirely. Chairman Cross
received consensus that the Council would provide comments to EPD on the proposed rule change.
PC Martello discussed the meeting agenda and objectives.
2) Committee Review & Updates
Mr. Martello stated that the Plan Review Committee (chaired by Bruce Azevedo) had been working with
the PC on reviewing the draft Plan as sections were updated.
Tom Wiedmeier noted that the Technical Committee had been involved in selection of management
practices for the Plan. The committee is aware that EPD has responded to the initial proposed
management practices and has requested additional conservation measures be specified. Braye Boardman
suggested that Georgia and South Carolina share the Savannah River and everyone needs to be conscious
of efficient water use. Mr. Wiedmeier discussed management practices and how the management
practices were selected based on the goal to closing gaps within the region. Vice-Chair Charlie Newton
was concerned that if management practices not required for closing gaps were included in the Plan, those
management practices would be used for permitting conditions and may end up hurting local
governments. Mr. Goran indicated there had been some confusion within the Council regarding the
relationship between planning and regulatory compliance and how the Water Stewardship Act fits into the
State Water Planning effort.
The Council’s Interstate Coordination Committee has been involved with the Savannah River Basin
Advisory Council and Scott McGregor attended the last meeting in South Carolina on December 8. Scott
Willett of Anderson Regional Joint Water System summarized the key items that were discussed: a
presentation from the USACE on the Comprehensive 2 Plan, Level 4 Drought Operating Plan (which
would be their emergency action plan during severe drought), and the expansion of the Savannah Harbor.
There was a presentation from the Thurmond Institute (Clemson University) on their analysis of lake
level impacts on the economy for communities surrounding Lake Hartwell, and a presentation from Duke
Power on relicensing process for the facility at Lake Keowee and the stream modeling being done in
conjunction with the USACE.
Mr. Martello discussed the ad hoc meeting held on December 7 concerning Environmental Flow policy.
EPD currently allows three options on minimum instream flow (monthly 7Q10, percentage of mean
annual flow, or site specific studies) and this issue is receiving further study and analysis. Minimum
instream flows are typically determined based on either monthly 7Q10 flow or natural flow (whichever is
less). This is how current water withdrawal permits are issued but this may change in the future.
 It was noted that the TMDL stakeholders group has met, selected a facilitator, and are moving forward
toward a mutually agreeable TMDL implementation plan.
3) Draft Plan Review and Management Practices
Mr. Martello provided an overview of the management practices specific to surface water quantity gaps at
the Eden Node and at the Little Tennessee Node. Management practices for closing assimilative capacity
(surface water quality) gaps were also discussed. Programmatic and regulatory management practices
were reviewed, especially those critical to implementing water conservation and water use efficiency.
Management practices are divided in the draft Plan as Priority Practices and Additional Recommended
Practices.
Q: Concerning WS1, Mr. Walker was not sure if a feasibility study could be considered a management
practice and that this management practice may need to be removed or written in the Plan in a different
way.
Vice Chair Newton asked if the feasibility study is needed to determine cost, who would be responsible
for such a cost? He commented that the way the management practice is written gives agricultural
stakeholders flexibility in the management practice.
Mr. Martello presented the Implementation Schedule and Benchmarks for all of the priority management
practices and discussed how they were organized.
Q: What about groundwater wells affecting river level?
Mr. Martello responded that this was why site specific investigation is necessary for groundwater sources.
Q: Is the Little Tennessee gap a future gap and not current gap?
Mr. Martello responded that the gap does not currently exist. The water demand forecast assumed future
demand using the capacity of an existing Rabun County withdrawal permit for municipal or industrial use
and this may affect the available instream flows in the future.
Mr. Wiedmeier expressed concerns about the management practice suggesting moratorium on septic
systems being too harsh and suggested the language be revised. There was general consensus from the
Council.
Mr. Boardman questioned the definition of “Master Plan” in WQ1 and WS6.
Mr. Martello responded that it refers to community/system specific Water and Wastewater Master Plans
and not a Comprehensive Plan.
Mr. Walker brought up the fact that Rabun had high unaccounted for water (UAW) and wanted to make
sure UAW is addressed in the management practices. Ms. Denion discussed new requirements on
programs (annual water audit) for UAW in the Water Stewardship Act.
Mr. Boardman asked why the 90-day extension was given? Mr. Martello stated that other councils
requested more time.
 Chairman Cross suggested that the Council hold a joint meeting with the Coastal Georgia Council in
January.
4) Schedule for Completion
Mr. Martello closed the meeting by asking everyone to review the draft Plan and submit comments to
him. It is proposed that the next council meeting be scheduled during the first week in February. He
proposed several interim milestones:
•   Week of January 10 – Technical Committee and Plan Review Committee meet to compile
    preliminary comments.
•   Week of January 17 – Compile all Council comments and suggest modifications. Distribute revised
    draft Plan to Council (end of January).
•   February 3 – Hold Council Meeting #9. Review and discuss proposed modifications to draft Plan.
    Obtain Council concurrence with changes.
•   February 15 – Prepare final draft Plan for submittal to EPD.
5) Elected Official and Public Comments
Chairman Cross asked if there were any final comments, and there were none.
6) Meeting Wrap-up
Chairman Cross thanked the Council members for attending the meeting. Chairman Cross thanked Vice
Chairman Newton for coordinating the meeting space and the meeting was adjourned.
7) Action Items
     • PC to draft response to EPD on proposed interbasin transfer rule change
     • PC to provide location for Council Meeting #9
     • PC to draft modified language for the interbasin transfer goal for Council review
 CM#8 Meeting Attendees
Council Members in attendance     Partnering Agencies in attendance
Ron Cross, Chair                  Robert Amos, Georgia Soil & Water Conservation
Braye Boardman                    Patti Lamford, Georgia DNR, Water Resources Division
Jerry Boling                      Deatre Denion, Department of Community Affairs
Don Dye
Mike Eskew                        General Public in attendance
Dan Fowler (Alternate)            Doug Fulle, Oglethorpe Power Corporation
Pat Goran (Alternate)             Frank Carl, Savannah River Keeper
Toye Hill                         Sam Booker
Tom Jordan                        Scott Willett, Anderson Regional Joint Water
Chris McCorkle                    Katherine Cummings, FACE
Tim McGill
Charlie Newton
Larry Walker
Lee Webster
Tom Wiedmeier
Council Members not in attendance
Bruce Azevedo
Charles Cawthon
Deke Copenhaver
Barry Cronic
Patricia Goodwin (Alternate)
Larry Guest
Ralph Hudgens (Ex-Officio)
Robert Jenkins
Scott MacGregor
Eddie Madden
James H. Newsome
Lewis Sanders
Stan Sheppard
Tom McCall (Ex-Officio)
Tenia Workman
Staff in attendance
Jeff Larson, EPD
Brian Baker, EPD
Bill Martello, Jacobs
Rita Kelly, Jacobs
 