

   

 

B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.3  

June 16, 2009 
  
 To:    Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council 
 From:    Kristin Rowles, GWPPC and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch 
 cc:     Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD 
 Subject:   Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 2 on June 11, 2009 
  
The council meeting was held on June 11, 2009 at the Kirbo Regional Center at Bainbridge College in Bainbridge, GA. The list of attendees is attached. In addition to 
these minutes, all the presentations (slides) discussed in this meeting will be posted on the Statewide Water Planning web portal (http://www.georgiawaterplanning.org). 
 Welcome and Introductions / Recap Council Meeting 1/Approve Agenda/EPD 
Process Overview  
Council Chair Richard Royal stated that a quorum was present and the meeting should begin. Council member John Bridges gave an invocation. Mr. Royal recognized Council 
members that were not present at Council Meeting 1 (CM 1), and they each made brief introductions. 
 Council Chair Richard Royal stated that he and Vice Chair Hal Haddock met with Dr. 
Carol Couch (GAEPD), Cliff Lewis (GAEPD), Dave Eigenberg (GA Soil & Water Conservation Commission), and Brent Dykes (GA Soil & Water Conservation 
Commission) on June 9 in Perry, GA. He said that they discussed concerns that he and other Council persons had expressed about the Council's purpose, the state's intention for 
the statewide planning process, and the Council's ability to make decisions. They also discussed concerns about agricultural water use metering data, how the meter program is 
being implemented, and how the meter data will be used. Chairman Royal stated that he felt very comfortable about the meeting. He said the irrigation data and its use would be 
reviewed in today's meeting. He also said that he felt satisfied about the Council's ability to operate and make decisions in the manner intended. Council Vice Chair Hal Haddock 
stated that the Council members represented communities that are primarily agricultural. He said he also felt good about the meeting with Dr. Couch and the Council's ability to 
address their unique water needs.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
 Council member Chris Hobby of Bainbridge welcomed the group to Bainbridge and the 
meeting at Bainbridge College.  
Kristin Rowles introduced the planning consultant team. Next, she referred the Council members to the meeting minutes and summary for CM 1.  She noted that the CM 1 
summary should be changed to reflect that Jerry Lee was present at CM 1.  She asked if any members had other comments on the CM1 summary and minutes, and there were 
none.  The summary and minutes for Council Meeting 1 were approved.  
Kristin noted that there was concern that some members were not getting their meeting materials.  She noted that each member had been contacted by phone to confirm receipt 
of the meeting materials, and she asked members to alert the planning consultant team if Council materials were not being received. Next she reviewed the goals for today's 
meeting:  

1.  Review and approve (if possible) the MOA 2.  Review population and employment forecasts 
3.  Hear an overview of agricultural water use and metering 4.  Introduce resource assessments -- their purpose and approach 
5.  Continue to create a regional vision  
Next, Kristin reviewed the agenda for the meeting.  She noted that some revisions to the original agenda had been proposed and a proposed revised agenda was passed out.  The 
changes included:  

\Gamma   Moving the population and employment forecast discussion to the afternoon in order to accommodate the schedule for the demographers that would be available 

to answer questions by phone during that part of the meeting. 
\Gamma   The addition of a brief presentation to provide an overview of the planning process by Tim Cash, GA EPD. 

The Council members approved the revised agenda with no objections.   
Next, Tim Cash provided an overview of the planning process and its various components.  His presentation focused on how the Council will use the resource 
assessments and forecasts to develop a water development and conservation plan. The slides for his presentation are available on the Council website with the Council Meeting 
2 (CM2) materials.   
Council members had questions and comments for Tim on his presentation. Council member Jimmy Webb asked "Where will rainfall predictions be addressed?"  Tim said 
the agricultural water use forecasting factors in long term variations in climate. Council  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
member Howard Small stated that there is not a lot more land that will be cleared and added to the agricultural base in the future. He said the agricultural water use forecasts 
should not consider new land so much as changes in the types of crops. Jimmy Webb added that agricultural technology may have reached a point where technology may not 
affect agricultural production as much as it has in the past. Tim stated that these comments reflect the kind of information, based on experience, that the state needs to 
consider as the forecasts are prepared.  
Council member John Bridges asked why in one of Tim's slides the forecasts appear to delay the implementation of conservation by 20 years.  He asked why these measures 
cannot start sooner. Tim said the Council has the opportunity to adjust the implementation of conservation and other management measures.     
 Tim's presentation reviewed with the group that: 

T,   Resource Assessments are being conducted by EPD, and they will establish the amount of water that is available to the region. 
T,   Forecasts being prepared by EPD and its partners will estimate the region's future water needs. 
T,   The Regional Water Councils will use the resource assessments and forecasts to identify unmet future needs. 
T,   The Regional Water Councils will identify management practices that could be used to expand the capabilities of and/or reduce demand on their water resources. 
T,   The Regional Water Councils will recommend Regional Plans to EPD that includes those management practices. 
T,   EPD permit decisions will be guided by the Regional Plans.    
MOA, Operating Procedures, and Rules for Meetings  
Next, Kristin referred the Council to the documents that had been sent with feedback from GA EPD on changes to the MOA and related documents suggested by the Council 
at CM1.  Hand-outs of the documents were passed out.  Tim Cash (GA EPD) introduced the GA EPD responses to the Council's requested changes. He noted that GA EPD 
reviewed the comments and suggestions made by all 10 regional water councils.   
Kristin noted that the Council could adopt these documents today if the GA EPD responses were approved, and if not, adoption of the MOA and related documents could 
proceed at CM 3. She reminded the Council members that when they sign the MOA, they are doing so as individuals, not as representatives of their organizations, and that signing 
the MOA was an acknowledgment of their agreement to participate in the process.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
Next, Kristin reviewed the changes. The "Desired Changes in MOA Companion Documents" file was the guide for this discussion (attached).  The members also referred 
to "redline" versions of the Operating Procedures and Rules for Meetings that had proposed changes marked (attached). 
 In "Desired Changes in MOA Companion Documents", GA EPD listed changes 
suggested by the Council. Changes accepted by GA EPD were noted by a lack of highlighting and comment. Generally, these changes that were accepted by GA EPD did 
not require discussion, and Kristin just noted these. Where GA EPD did not accept the Council's proposed change, the change was highlighted and usually, alternative language 
was suggested by GA EPD.  Discussion focused on these items, and this discussion is summarized below.   
 Operating Procedures 
 Under Council Leadership, for the term for the Chair and Vice-Chair, Chairman Royal 
commented that a change to a 1 year term for Chair and Vice Chair seemed acceptable. The Council accepted this modification with no objection. 
 Under Decision Making, Chairman Royal stated that the simple majority vote provision 
as a fallback when consensus could not be reached, after a reasonable discussion period, was an acceptable compromise. Council member Chris Hobby stated that consensus 
decision making is well intended, but in his experience, a simple majority vote provision seems to lead to more efficient decision making. He asked whether the Metro District is 
using consensus decision making in their water planning process because he thought the regional planning councils were supposed to be doing things the same way the Metro 
District was.  Tim Cash explained that the planning process for the Metro District was established by State law and therefore could differ in some aspects from the regional 
planning process.  Council member Jimmy Webb was not in favor of the alternative language which provided for consensus with simple majority vote as a fallback. Council 
member Mike Newberry stated that the ability to call for a vote was important. Chairman Royal called for vote on the provision as revised (consensus decision making with simple 
majority voting as a fallback after a reasonable discussion). The motion passed: 13 in favor, 4 opposed, and 2 abstentions.  
 Chairman Royal noted that if the process was not working, the procedures could be 
revisited. He asked if the provision to change the Operating Procedures and Rules for Meetings was addressed. Kristin confirmed that this provision was included under the 
Amendments section of the Operating Procedures.       

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
Kristin noted that GA EPD has proposed a change to the language regarding Council member resignation under Meeting and Governance.  GA EPD suggests that the language 
be modified to read that all council members may resign by "submitting a resignation in writing to the Director of EPD, who will notify the appointing officials." This section 
previously said that resignations should be sent to "the State official that made that member's initial appointment with a copy to the Director of EPD."  The Council 
members did not have a concern about this proposed change and found it acceptable. However, this item led to a discussion of Council member succession in the event of a 
resignation. Council member George McIntosh asked for clarification on whether in the event of a resignation, an appointed alternate member would be appointed to fill the 
vacancy. Council member Steve Sykes added that the Council needs the continuity of an experienced member and was concerned that if a new person were appointed (instead of 
an alternate), the new person would be less informed and not as effective a member as an alternate who had already been participating. Tim Cash (GA EPD) stated that the rules 
for appointment of council members were addressed in the Statewide Water Plan and were not addressed in the MOA and companion documents. Council member T.E. Moye 
said that he thought that the Governor's office would surely consult the Council prior to a new appointment. Council member George McIntosh urged for clarification. Senator 
John Bulloch, ex-officio council member, suggested that Chairman Royal send a letter to the Governor, Lt. Governor, and Speaker of the House (the appointing authorities) 
urging them to consider the appointment of alternates in the event of the resignation of a Council member. Chairman Royal and the Council members had no objection to this 
course of action.  
Rules for Meetings  
In the Rules for Meetings, communications with the media was discussed by the Council. GA EPD did not accept the Council's proposal that "the Chair will speak to the media on 
behalf of the Council." Instead, GA EPD proposed: 

\Gamma   Deleting the following sentence about the GA EPD representative from Rule 2.E: "The representative is also available to talk with members of the media." 

\Gamma   Adding the following under Rule 3.A: "8. Media communications will be coordinated between the Chair and the EPD representative." 
 Council member Greg Murray asked whether only the Chair could speak to the media, 
and several members responded that anyone could speak to the media, but only the Chair can do so in an official capacity representing the Council. 
 Next, Council member Jimmy Webb asked for clarification: "Do the rules require that the 
Council Chair and a representative from GA EPD be present for all media interviews? Why can't the Chair handle these types of interviews on occasion? Why does EPD have  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
to be present at all the interviews?" Tim Cash (GA EPD) stated that it was important that all the Councils have the benefit of an EPD representative for media interviews when 
needed. There was discussion about the practical means to arrange this. Tim clarified that the proposed alternative languages calls for "coordination between the Chair and EPD" 
and does not require that both representatives be present at all media interviews, nor would it require approval of either of the parties prior to media contact. Council member 
Webb stated that it was important that the Chair be able to speak for the Council. Tim further stated that the Chair nor EPD would not need prior approval from the other to 
speak to the media but that following any media interview that it would be incumbent on both parties to inform the other of media contacts so that the other party would not have 
to "read about it in the newspaper."  Discussion about the meaning of "coordination" followed.  Chairman Royal asked Tim to clarify what was intended for coordination of 
media communications by phone call to Carol Couch (GA EPD Director) during the morning break in the council meeting.  
 After the break, the Council discussed the matter further. The following language was 
considered as a replacement for Rule 3.A.8: "Media communications will be coordinated between the Chair and the EPD representative. The Chair may speak to the media on 
behalf of the Council without prior approval of EPD. The EPD representative may speak to the media without prior approval of the Chair." Discussion followed. Several members 
were concerned that the language did not give the Chair the flexibility and authority to represent the Council in relations with the media. Council member Champion noted that 
following from the Chair and Vice-Chair's meeting with Dr. Couch, he believed that the Council leadership should have the authority to serve as the Council spokesperson. 
Several members agreed, and one member proposed that the suggested language be modified so that the first two sentences were dropped so that Rule 3.A.8 reads: "The 
Chair may speak to the media on behalf of the council without prior approval of EPD." The Chair called for a vote on this issue, and the results were: 18 in favor, and 1 
abstention.  The Chair asked that Tim Cash contact Dr. Couch to determine whether this language was acceptable. Further discussion of this issue was postponed until later in the 
meeting.  
Also in the rules for meetings, the Council had proposed the removal of all references to consensus decision making and establishment of the use of Robert's Rules of Order. As 
discussed above, GA EPD had not accepted removal of consensus decision-making, but approved the use of simple majority voting as a fallback procedure.  With respect to 
Robert's Rules of Order, the following alternative was proposed: "For all decision-making situations not specifically addressed in the rules for meetings, Robert's Rules of 
Order will be followed." Based on prior discussion of consensus and the simple majority vote fallback, the Council found this change acceptable. Chairman Royal 
noted that he would prefer to use his own language in testing for consensus. He said that  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
he would usually ask the group whether they had any objections to a proposal, rather than using the specific language included in the hand-out at the last meeting. When asked, Tim 
Cash noted that this was acceptable.   
Kristin asked whether there were any other questions or comments about proposed changes to the MOA companion documents.  Hearing none, the Chairman asked whether 
there were any objections to approving the MOA companion documents as discussed, noting the need to resolve the media communication language. The Council members 
had no objections to the Chairman's proposal that the rest of the changes be approved.  
  
Introduction to Resource Assessments  
Steve Simpson reviewed an introduction to modeling, types of models, and the use of modeling for the resource assessments pertaining to the statewide water planning effort. 
He provided an introduction to the development of the resource assessments, which will serve as the basis for determining the status and capacity of the region's water resources. 
The slides from the modeling and introductory resource assessment presentation will be available on the council website with materials from CM2. 
 During this presentation, Council member George McIntosh asked, "How deep will we 
get into modeling prior to reviewing the results? What input will the Council have on the modeling?" He expressed concern about the depth and background that the Council will 
have on the input data and predictions and an understanding of the outcomes from the models. Council member Huddy Hudgens questioned the accuracy of this year's rainfall 
amount and the fact that the projections did not predict the actual amounts. Council member Doyle Medders stated that "This year's climatology predictions were so far off. 
The predictions called for a continuation of drought, yet the rainfall was such that the state called an end to the drought this week." Chairman Royal offered a point of order, 
reminding the Council that they would have opportunity to review, question and ask for clarification throughout the course of the planning effort inclusive to modeling input and 
results.  
With respect to the resource assessments, Council member Chuck Lingle noted that thermoelectric use was not all consumptive and a large portion was returned after 
cooling. In regard to groundwater use and withdrawals, Council member Jimmy Webb noted that the graphic shown in Steve's slides were 2004 reported data, not actual usage. 
He added that the actual usage varies year to year depending on rainfall and other factors. Mr. Webb further emphasized that the 2004 data may have been over-reported by farmers  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
due to concerns about limitations on withdrawals. He felt the reported data were not representative and not valid.  
 Council member John Bridges asked if the modeling was detailed to the point that 
predictions could be made for each of the respective aquifers and whether it addressed the interactions between ground and surface waters, which are extensive in the region. 
Planning contractor Nils Thompson confirmed that the modeling would be detailed enough to make these kinds of predictions. Council member T.E. Moye asked for 
clarification on use of the word "mining" by Thompson with respect to the use of water from the Floridan aquifer. They noted that there has been sufficient replenishment of 
water in the southeastern aquifers and "mining" was not an accurate term.  
Council member George McIntosh noted that the primary aquifer in the Lower Flint Council is not in the scope of work for the resource assessments. Chairman Royal asked 
to hear from the state geologist about why the Upper Floridan and the Claiborne aquifers were not included in Groundwater Resources Assessment scope of work 
(underway for the statewide water planning effort).   
At the conclusion of this discussion, the Council broke for lunch. (The agricultural water metering discussion and the public involvement plan discussion were postponed until 
after lunch.)  
MOA, Operating Procedures, and Rules for Meetings (revisited)  
After lunch, Kristin and Chairman Royal noted that based on initial feedback from GA EPD during lunch, the media communications issue would require further discussion. 
Chairman Royal announced the appointment of a subcommittee to further discuss the communication guidelines in the Rules for Meetings.  
  Communication Subcommittee:  

Jimmy Webb, John Bridges, Bill Yearta, Hal Haddock and Richard Royal  
Chairman Royal noted that Hal Haddock would serve as Chair of the subcommittee. The subcommittee will work toward resolving this issue with GA EPD before the next council 
meeting.   
Agricultural Metering Program Status Update  
At CM1, Council members requested a presentation on the status of the state agricultural water withdrawal metering program. Dave Eigenberg from the GA Soil and Water 
Conservation Commission (GSWCC) made a presentation to the council to respond to  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
this request.  The slides from his presentation are included on the council website with materials from CM2. 
 Dave noted that the date for all agricultural water withdrawal permitted sites to be 
metered was originally June 2009, but the deadline has been extended because the initiative has not received all the necessary funding for the program. Additional 
appropriations by the state are needed to fully fund the program. To date, 8635 meters have been installed. In the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee region, 60% of EPD permits are 
metered.   

Status of the LFO Water Planning Council Ag Metering  
EPD Permits:    7,241 Metered Permits     3,580 
    Surface Water      925 Groundwater   3.237 

No pump present:    1,537  
Note: "No pump present" pertains to some of the sites that use portable pumps that have not been located (and have not been fitted with meters). 
 For 2010, EPD plans to install an additional 610 meters below the fall line in the Lower 
Ocmulgee Basin; no meters are proposed to be installed above the fall line.  
Dave offered the following explanation for missing sites: 

\Gamma   Additional irrigated land developed 
\Gamma   Improved data 
\Gamma   No EPD permit 
\Gamma   GSWCC error  

Dave noted that the uses of the ag water metering data are: (1) to provide a water management tool to assist in data collection for water conservation programs, (2) to help 
identify irrigation systems where application rates are high when compared to subbasin average, enabling better utilization of agency's cost share dollars, (3) to track ag water 
use by subbasin or area of concern, (4) to provide an EPD a ground-truthed permit inventory, and (5) to provide data to support ag water use demand forecasting. 
 Cliff Lewis (GA EPD) provided additional information on the ag metering program. As a 
point of clarification, the agricultural forecasts [to be discussed in the next presentation] used wetted acreage data provided by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Under the current plan, the forecasts will be revised at least every 3 to 5 years. The  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 10  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
metering data can be used to do a comparative analysis and to cross-check against actual conditions and actual results. The forecasts will therefore be used for ongoing water 
planning in the region. Cliff stated that some validation has already been done in adjacent areas to the LFO, and the results validate the forecasts within approximately 10 percent. 
 Cliff said that EPD and the GSWCC conduct a "rigorous data reconciliation on a monthly 
basis." He further stated that the data are accurate including land acreage, metered water and other information. A full presentation on the agricultural water use forecasts will be 
provided at the next council meeting.   
Council member Jimmy Webb expressed concern that the water usage (and meter data collected thus far) may not accurately reflect future use due to a shift in crop types. 
Several members expressed concerns that the metering program may eventually lead to restrictions on the rates and amounts of withdrawals and thereby restricts farmers' 
decision about land use and farming practices. Chairman Royal stated that the original intent of the ag metering program was to defend the practices of farmers and provide 
sound data about water usage. Prior to ag metering in Georgia, both the state of Georgia and the state of Florida were overstating ag water usage by Georgia farmers. 
 Council member Howard Small asked about whether the water usage data was "growing 
season" [as shown on the reports from the state] or annual usage? Dave Eigenberg stated that the data are reported for annual usage and the report incorrectly states "growing 
season".  
It was noted that meter readings showed an average ag water use of 9 acre-inches annually. One member asked for a comparison of ag water use to municipal and 
industrial water use in the region.  Another member asked about meter calibration. In FY 2010, 1-1.5% of the meters will be assessed in the field for recalibration. 
 Introduction to Agriculture Water Demand Forecasts 
 Following from the discussion of the metering program, Mark Masters from the Georgia 
Water Planning and Policy Center provided an introduction to the agricultural water demand forecasts, which will be presented at CM3.  His slides will be available on the 
council website with materials from CM2.  
Mark's presentation included an overview of crops, associated water usage, irrigated amounts, types of irrigation equipment, seasonal patterns of irrigation, changes over time, 
and trends.      

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
Population and Employment Forecasts  
For the discussion of the population and employment forecasts, Kathy Kinsella (Office of Planning & Budget (OPB)), Dr. Warren Brown (Carl Vinson Institute Government 
Applied Demography Program), Dr. Jeffrey Dorfman (UGA Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics) joined the meeting by telephone. Dr. Brown and Dr. Dorfman 
led the development of the population and employment forecasts.  
Kristin stated that the comment period is open until June 30th (it has been extended). Thus far, only two comments have been received from the LFO area elected officials, and these 
comments did not suggest new information or changes. She reminded members to contact local government officials that might be interested in comments on the population and 
employment forecasts.  
Kristin noted that the population and employment forecasts would be used to project the future demand for water for municipal and industrial water uses. She presented slides 
(included on the council website with the CM2 meeting materials) that described the types of input that was needed to finalize the estimates and that presented the estimates, 
statewide and in the region.  Hand-outs of county level data on population projections and industry specific data on employment projections for the region were passed out. 
 Council member Jimmy Webb asked whether adjustments were made to account for the 
economic recession. Kristin noted that was an adjustment that had been made.  Dr. Dorfman explained that to make this adjustment, they manually adjusted the 2010 retail, 
finance and construction job forecasts to 95 percent of 2008 levels. Then, population data were also adjusted for 2010. Council members expressed concern that many sectors 
declined since 2008, and that construction sector declines of only 5% were not accurate. One member said it was more like a 75% decline in the construction sector at this time. 
They expressed some skepticism in forecasts.  
Another member asked why the population forecast dips down in 2040. Dr. Brown explained that this dip was the result of the modeling methods, and more specifically a 
result of the transition from demographic projections to a reliance on a combined demographic/workforce projection throughout the period. He noted that the revisions to 
the population and employment forecasts will eliminate the slight dip in 2040.  
Council member Howard Small noted that Lee and Thomas counties are Tier 1 counties under DCA ratings, and that they are the more fast-growing counties in the region. He 
asked why they showed little growth in the projections.  Discussion followed, with assistance from Casey Dean (DCA representative) to clarify the Tier ratings used by 
DCA.    

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
 Dr. Brown noted that revised projections will be released in August 2009. In late 2011 
(after the 2010 census), the projections will be revised again.   
Chairman Royal asked how Education Services are defined in the employment sector classifications. He noted that he would have expected higher levels of employment in this 
sector, even in the current year, as well as in the projections.  Dr. Dorfman stated that the definitions come from the 2002 definitions of the North American Industry Classification 
System (NAICS), which is the official federal and state system of categories for employers and their jobs. He read the Education Services definition:  
  Sector 61--Educational Services - The Educational Services sector 

comprises establishments that provide instruction and training in a wide variety of subjects. This instruction and training is provided by specialized 
establishments, such as schools, colleges, universities, and training centers. These establishments may be privately owned and operated for profit or not 
for profit, or they may be publicly owned and operated. They may also offer food and accommodation services to their students. 
 Council members asked that they check whether the estimate for this sector is accurate. 
 There were several comments from council members regarding the accuracy of the 
population and employment forecasts. The Chair noted that the importance of these forecasts was somewhat limited for the LFO region due to the prominence of agricultural 
water use in the region. The council members generally agreed.      
Creating a Regional Vision  
Kristin presented some slides to describe the development of a regional vision to guide the Council in the development of the regional water plan.  (These slides are included on 
the council's website with materials for CM2.) She referred to the vision for the statewide water plan: 
  Georgia manages water resources in a sustainable manner to: 1.  Support the state's economy 

2.  Protect public health and natural systems 3.  Enhance the quality of life for all citizens  
She said that the Council's vision would describe how the statewide vision applies in this region.  The vision would help in the development of goals for the regional water plan 
and in the selection of management practices, in combination with the resource assessments and water use demand forecasts.   
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 13  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
She said that at the next meeting, we would work to develop a shared vision for the Council, and that before that, the Council members would need to think about their 
individual ideas for the vision.  She passed out a hand-out (attached) that described a "homework" assignment to prepare for the vision discussion at the next council meeting. 
Overall, the hand-out asks Council members to list their ideas in response to the following question: What do you want your rivers, lakes and groundwater to do for you 
and the citizens in your planning region?  
She reminded the members about the discussion of Trends, Forces, and Factors at CM1 and referred them to the CM1 meeting summary for an overview of this discussion. She 
briefly reviewed the trends, forces, and factors identified for the region's water resources by the group at CM1. These items might be helpful as they consider their responses to the 
above over-arching question.  
Public Involvement Plan   
Kristin returned to this agenda item that was postponed from the morning discussion.  She said that EPD will soon issue a public involvement plan for finalization by the 
regional water planning councils. The Public Involvement Plan will provide the opportunity for stakeholder participation from the local government advisory 
body, other regional water planning councils, and the public during the regional water  planning process. Public involvement will be provided for at each of the Council's 
meetings (minimum quarterly) through comment periods for local government officials and the public at each meeting. Public involvement will also include interacting with 
neighboring councils with which this region shares water resources.  This will occur in part through joint council meetings. In the event of conflict between regional water 
planning councils, we will follow dispute resolution procedures outlined in the technical planning guidance to be provided by EPD. After EPD issues a draft public involvement 
plan, the regional councils will finalize it and then implement it.   
One Council member had a question about the establishment of the Local Government Advisory Board - when it was done and who was contacted. Kristin noted that the lead 
elected official and the clerk for each local government (municipal and county) in the state had received a DVD with the introduction to the population and employment 
forecasts in the past month.  With the DVD, they received a letter asking for each local government to identify a local official who could serve as a representative to their 
region's water planning council's local government advisory board.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 14  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
Local Elected Officials and Public Comments  
Next, the Council provided time for local elected officials and the general public an opportunity to address the council.  There were no elected officials who spoke. One 
public commenter spoke. Glen Heard from the Decatur County Farm Bureau addressed the Council. He asked that the Council investigate whether the ban on new well permits 
in capacity use areas (red zones in Flint Plan map) could be lifted. The Chair asked whether the Council could get a report on this issue.  Tim Cash noted that he would 
look into the issue.  Mark Masters assisted Tim in clarifying which zones were of concern to the commenter with reference to specific portions of the Flint River Basin Water 
Development and Conservation Plan. The Council members had several questions about the Flint Plan, some of which Mark and Tim addressed, but Kristin noted that a more 
thorough discussion of the Flint Plan was scheduled for the CM3 agenda.  
Wrap-Up and What to Expect Next Meeting  
The Council selected September 15 for its next meeting, which will be held at Jimmy Webb's barn in Leary, GA.  The Council selected November 17 for Council Meeting 4.  
It was suggested that this meeting be held in Albany, at a place to be determined.  
Kristin reviewed a list of items that would be on the CM3 agenda:  

\Gamma   Visioning 
\Gamma   Resource Assessments 
\Gamma   Joint Meetings 
\Gamma   Public Involvement Plan 
\Gamma   MOA Execution  
\Gamma   Regulatory Process Primer  
\Gamma   Regional Geography (319 and TMDL examples for region) 
\Gamma   Agricultural Water Use Forecasts  
\Gamma   M & I Forecasting Methodology  
\Gamma   Management Practices Overview   

Council Meeting 2 Evaluation At the conclusion of the council meeting, the members completed evaluation forms on 
the meeting, including one evaluation for the Carl Vinson Institute of Government and an additional evaluation for GA EPD.  Then, the meeting was adjourned. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 15  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
Action List 

\Gamma   Report on status of agricultural withdrawal permits in capacity use areas in Flint Basin 

\Gamma   Communication Subcommittee to work with EPD toward resolving media communications language in Rules for Meetings 
\Gamma   Report from state geologist about selection of aquifers for groundwater resource assessment priority list 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 16  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  June 16, 2009 
Meeting Date: June 11, 2009 
 

   
Attachment 1:  Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  
Council Meeting Attendance - June 11, 2009   
Council Members Steve Bailey  
John M. Bridges  John Bulloch (Ex-Officio)  
Dean Burke  Jimmy Champion  
Terry Clark Hal Haddock  
Chris Hobby  Huddy R. Hudgens, Jr. (Alternate)  
Gary W. Leddon  Jerry Lee  

Chuck Lingle  George C. McIntosh (Alternate)  
T.E. Moye  Greg Murray  
Mike Newberry  Richard Royal  
Howard G. Small Jr.  Steve Sykes  
Will Vereen  Jimmy Webb  
Bill Yearta  
Council Members Not In Attendance  Bob Hanner (Ex-Officio)  
Jim Quinn  Jerry Chapman  
John A. Heath  John G. Herring  
Doyle Medders (Alternate)  Steve Singletary  
Rick Moss   
Planning Consultants  Kristin Rowles, GWPPC  
Steve Simpson, B&V Jim Hawkins, B&V 
Nils Thompson, LGB Mark Masters, GWPPC 
 Georgia EPD  
Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  Cliff Lewis 
Edward Rooks  
  

 Georgia Soil and Water Conservation 
Commission Dave Eigenberg 
Ben Mosely  
Georgia Department of Community Affairs 
Casey Dean   Robert Osborne 44 10 15 17 5 109 3 167 1  -14400 MEETING MINUTES  LFO_CM2_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 8.1 for Word 