

B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.2  

February 16, 2011 
  

  
To:   Lower  Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  
From:    Kristin Rowles, GWPPC and Robert Osborne, Black & Veatch  
cc:     Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD  
Subject:   Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 9 on February 10, 2011  
 The council meeting was held on February 10, 2011, at Cotton Hall in Colquitt.  The list 
of attendees is attached.  In addition to these minutes, the presentations (slides) discussed in this meeting will be posted on the Lower Flint web portal (http://www.lowerflint.org/). 
 Welcome, Introductions and Chairman's discussion

  

Chairman Royal started the meeting by recognizing Jerry Chapman, council member and mayor of Colquitt, who welcomed the Council to Colquitt. John Bridges provided an 
invocation. Next, Chairman Royal asked the Council to approve the meeting summary and the meeting agenda.  The council approved the meeting summary from the last 
council meeting and the agenda for the meeting by consensus.  
The Council next conducted an election for chair and vice-chair. There were nominations with seconds for both Richard Royal and Hal Haddock to continue in their current 
positions as chair and vice-chair, respectively. No other candidates were nominated.  Richard Royal and Hal Haddock indicated their willingness to serve if elected.  
Richard Royal and Hal Haddock were elected chair and vice-chair, respectively, for calendar year 2011 by unanimous vote via written ballots. 
 Chairman Royal asked the Council if any members who attended the ACF Councils Joint 
Meeting on January 27, 2011 would like to comment on the meeting.  Council member Jimmy Webb said that some of the discussion over the gap at Bainbridge seemed divisive 
and focused on the Lower Flint as the sole cause of the Bainbridge gap.  Webb said that he told the three councils that they need to be united, especially because of the tri-state 
water litigation.  Webb also said all three councils thought a reservoir would be needed to address the gap. Chairman Royal commented that the Governor has appropriated $300 
million dollars in the budget for reservoirs.   
Both Webb and Royal expressed concern over the model because even if all agricultural water use ceased, a gap would still occur. Council member John Heath also expressed  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 concern about the modeled gap; he is concerned that it could become a policy target 

instead of just assessment information. He suggested that the council try to redefine the gap terminology. He also questioned the need for the 5,000 cfs flow target in the 
Apalachicola and suggested that a way to measure water use reduction was needed.  Council member Huddy Hudgens said that the model is wrong, and Chairman Royal said 
that he is inclined to believe that.  
Council member Hal Haddock said that there seems to be a lack of understanding of how water moves underground in this region; the Upper Floridan (Dougherty Plain) aquifer 
recovers quickly from drawdown. Council member John Bridges commented that raising dams to increase reservoir storage is likely the least expensive option.  Royal said that the 
governor's plan is to increase the capacity of existing dams as well as build new wells.   
John Heath said that it may be that we cannot keep drilling wells if the gap is going to be addressed.  Steve Bailey asked: When the Corps of Engineers (COE) is releasing 15,000 
cfs over Woodruff Dam, what is the point of conservation? He said that the COE's releases waste so much water as to make conservation pointless. Jimmy Webb noted that 
Upper Flint members expressed surprise at the joint meeting that agricultural uses are not metered.  Council member John Bridges said this area has gone through three extreme 
droughts, and the results have not been dramatic.  
Next, Chairman Royal said that Tim Cash (EPD) had provided the Council the name of an attorney to consult on the Endangered Species Act (ESA). Royal noted that Cash had 
told him that the cost for the council to work with the lawyer would not be paid by EPD. Council member Jimmy Webb said that the council needs to consult a lawyer familiar 
with the ESA, mostly likely from the western U.S. Chairman Royal commented that the endangered species issue is going to persist, and he referred to a newspaper article on the 
issue from this week. Chairman Royal commented that he wondered if water users in the region were at risk without a Habitat Conservation Plan. As an alternative to a private 
lawyer, Webb suggested that the Council meet with the Region IV Director for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), Cynthia Dohner. Webb said that Dohner has 
experience with the Endangered Species Act and Habitat Conservation Plans, and she could provide the council with another perspective, at no cost.  Webb suggested that the 
council send a group to meet with Dohner.  Chairman Royal said the suggestion made sense and asked if there were any objections.  There were none. Chairman Royal asked 
that the meeting with Cynthia Dohner (USFWS) be arranged and that any council members wishing to participate indicate so to him. 
 Overview of Plan Revisions 
 Kristin Rowles reviewed the following timeline for the council: 
   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
  

Completion Date Milestone  
February 2011  Council Meeting 9 
March/April 2011  Council Meeting 10 
May 2, 2011  Recommended Plan to GAEPD 
May-July 2011  Public Notice of Draft Plan 
August 2011  Final Production of Adopted WDCP 
September 30, 2011  GAEPD Approves Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Regional WDCP 

 Kristin noted it was critical that any remaining issues are discussed as soon as possible. 
She said that on January 21, Council members received a revised review draft of the plan.  This draft addressed EPD's comments on the October 15th draft and council decisions 
from its December meeting. She said that after this meeting a revised draft will be prepared.   
 Kristin asked if the council would like the next draft to include mark-up notations (to 
indicate changes). Council members said that they would like to have mark-up notations.  
Kristin said that next she would review the changes in the January 21st draft.  First, she said that references to appendices had been changed to reference a set of supplemental 
materials for the plan; the supplemental materials will be housed on the council website.  
Sections 1 and 2 In addition to some minor text edits, Kristin said that there was new material provided for 
Sections 1.1 and 1.2 by EPD. She also said there was a revised map would be provided for Section 2 in the next draft.  
 Chairman Royal said he did not like the phrase "consensus based" on page 1-2 as a 
descriptor of the planning process.  Although a consensus was noted where possible, Robert's Rules were also used in decision making. Kristin said that she could strike this 
phrase.  Royal asked if there were any objections; there were none.    
Sections 3 and 4 Kristin said she added information about water resources shared with neighboring 
councils and made some clarifications regarding the assessment models. She said that the Division of Wildlife Resources was preparing some comments on Section 3, and she 
expected to receive these soon to share with the council via the appropriate committee.  In Section 4, she said that the section on water demand forecasts for thermoelectric power 
production (Section 4.4) was not complete and would be discussed further this afternoon.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 Kristin noted that the charts in Sections 3 and 4 had been revised for clarity of 

presentation.  
Section 5 Kristin noted that there were minor text and reference edits. There were also new water 
quality maps.  
Section 6 Kristin noted that Section 6.1 was edited for clarity and length. The discussion of 
uncertainties was modified to add additional information on how those issues are currently being addressed and where to get more information. Kristin said one of the 
uncertainties will be discussed in Water Quantity Committee report.  
Chairman Royal commented that the discussion about plan revisions was moving quickly and reminded council members that if they had any concerns or comments that they 
should address them now.  
In Section 6.2, the following changes were made to Table 6-1: 

\Gamma   New categories (Demand Management, Supply Management and Flow Augmentation, Water Quality) 

\Gamma   Numbered management practices 
\Gamma   Prioritization 
\Gamma   Changes to Management Practices based on council decisions and EPD comments: DM6, SF4, SF5, WQ1, WQ2, WQ3 

Following Table 6-1, Kristin said there were modifications in Section 6-2 to further explain the storage modeling run and the Council's selection of management practices 
vis-a`-vis identified gaps and the Council's vision and goals.  
Section 7 Kristin said there were changes to Section 7.4: Recommendations to the State. This 
section is now categorized into information needs and water policy recommendations.  She said that several of the items listed were new to this draft; she had culled them from 
meeting summaries to try to ensure that all recommendations that have been discussed were included. This section will be reviewed later today. Kristin would like the council's 
feedback on whether this section is complete.  
Kristin said that the remaining parts of Section 7 and the whole of Section 8 would be revised after this meeting.  
 After Kristin's overview, the council members again discussed their concerns about the 
surface water availability model and the gap identified by that model at Bainbridge. Council member John Heath suggested that the council re-define the gap. Kristin noted 
that in a committee report later this morning, there was a recommendation for language  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 based on John Heath's concern that the gap not be used as a policy tool. Richard Royal 

said that the gap has been defined for the council by EPD.  
In response to a question about what the gap means, Tim Cash (EPD) said that the gap is a metric to compare consumptive use against. Council member Jerry Lee said that the gap 
does not necessarily indicate something bad. Tim Cash said that the gap is not the impact; the impact of the gap has not been defined.   
 John Heath and Richard Royal said that there is a need to address model issues. After 
discussing concerns about the model, council members asked for clarification on how the gap arises in the model. Mark Masters explained that the model's flow target is based on 
natural (unimpaired) flows, and consumptive water use results in a gap. Chairman Royal asked whether a gap would exist if Upper Flint region impacts were not included in the 
model.  Masters answered yes. A council member asked if it is possible to eliminate the gap. Masters explained that the model had been run to indicate that the Flint Basin needs 
162,000 acre feet of storage to close the gap. The gap can also be closed by reducing consumptive use, but consumptive use needs to be completely stopped when flow is at or 
less than the metric in order to fully close the gap. Steve Simpson said that 162,000 acre-feet is about the size of half of West Point Lake; given other purposes and requirements 
of reservoir design, such as accounting for evaporation, a lake about the size of West Point would probably be needed to provide 162,000 acre-feet of storage for the purpose 
of addressing the gap.   
Council member John Heath expressed concern about the definition of unimpaired flows. Jimmy Webb asked if the gap is largest when flow is lowest.  Masters said not 
necessarily; while in general the gap is larger when the unimpaired (natural) flow is lower, the gap is due to the combination of consumptive water use and stream flow, and 
is largest when the combined effects are greatest.    
Council member Jimmy Champion suggested that the council should focus on the plan.  Kristin said that issues and recommendations related to the gap would come up later in 
the day.  Chairman Royal noted that they would come back to John Heath's concern in the Water Quantity Committee report. 
 Water Quantity Committee Report and Recommendation 
 Committee Chair Jimmy Webb asked Kristin to review the slides summarizing the 
committee's recommendations. Kristin said the committee met on February 8, 2011. At that meeting, the committee discussed Endangered Species Act issues, reviewed changes 
in January 21, 2011 draft plan, discussed further plan revisions, and developed recommendations to Council for today's meeting. Kristin passed out a meeting summary 
of the February 8th meeting.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 Kristin shared the following recommendation from the committee regarding the second 

bullet point (regarding 2008 Biological Opinion) on page 6-2 (Section 6.1):   

T,   Change the 2nd sentence to read as follows: "The consultation will continue ongoing depth distribution data collection and analysis to determine the minimum 

flows needed in order to protect listed species."   T,   Add a footnote referring to the statement of the Council's position on this issue on 
page 7-13.  
Jimmy Webb asked George Martin of Georgia Power, who was attending the council meeting and who had attended the joint council meeting on January 27th, if he had found 
out more about the specific flow needs of the power plant below Woodruff Dam.  At the joint council meeting, the members had wanted more information about what role the 
power plant's flow needs had played in setting the flow target for Woodruff Dam. Martin said that they were still looking into the answer. 
 Council member Greg Murray said to the council that, in his experience and observations 
of flow below Woodruff Dam, 5000 cfs in the Apalachicola River was not very much water; this is a VERY low flow.  He said that he doubted whether the USFWS would go 
much lower than that in setting their flow target.    
Kristen asked if there were any questions about the recommended change. There were no questions. The Council accepted the committee's recommendation by consensus.  
 Kristin said the next recommendation involved replacing management practices DM8 and 
DM9 with a new management practice written to emphasize the need for further study (as opposed to implementation) of the policy tools presented in these two management 
practices. The committee's recommendation is to replace management practices DM8 and DM9 with the following: 
 DM8: Research new tools for agricultural water demand management to determine 
their feasibility, costs, and benefits for Georgia.   

T,   Quantification of Agricultural Water Withdrawal Permits: Currently, the tools to manage agricultural water withdrawals in drought periods are limited to the 

Flint River Drought Protection Act and emergency powers at the discretion of the EPD Director. Quantification of agricultural withdrawal permit limits, based on 
use over a period of years, could allow for more precise management in a drought period. However, quantification is difficult to implement, and water users have 
significant concerns over this policy approach.  More study is needed to determine whether quantification would provide for more predictable and fair 
management of agricultural water demand in drought periods.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
  T,   Agricultural irrigation institutions: Irrigation institutions, such as irrigation 

districts, are used in other states to support farmers in sharing resources and developing common supply infrastructure. They can provide for local or regional 
management of water resources and support more flexible management approaches. More study is needed to determine whether these institutions would 
be appropriate and beneficial for water users and water resources in Georgia.  
The Council accepted this recommendation from the committee by consensus. The Water Quantity Committee report was concluded. 
 Water Quality Committee Report and Recommendations 
 Committee chair Jerry Lee made the report for the Water Quality Committee.  He said 
that in its February 3rd committee meeting, the committee reviewed changes in January  21st draft, discussed further plan revisions, developed recommendations to Council for 
today's meeting, and reviewed new water quality modeling results for the region. . 
Lee said the committee's first recommendation to the council was to change management 
practice WQ1 on page 6-10 as follows: 

\Gamma   Continue Improved enforcement of existing discharge permits  
\Gamma   Ensure continued Improved enforcement of erosion and sediment control regulations 

\Gamma   Continued implementation of Support for existing management plans and 

practices, such as the TMDL plans for specific stream reaches to address 
specific parameters  
\Gamma   Advocating Advocate for a study of methods for coordinating and applying 

existing state resources to comprehensively address water quality  
These changes were to address EPD questions seeking clarification about the management practice. Jerry asked if there were any questions, there were no questions.  

The Council accepted the committee's recommendation by consensus.   
The next recommendation involved the management practice WQ2 on page 6-10 by adding the following bullet point to the management practice description: 

T,   Create a complaint response program, similar to that of the Georgia Forestry Commission for the silvicultural industry, to provide for the resolution of 

water quality concerns from agricultural sources through coordination, cooperation, and technical assistance with agricultural landowners.  
 Jerry Lee explained that this complaint response program creates a buffer between 
agriculture and EPD on compliance issues. Lee said that for forestry, the Georgia Forestry Commission tries to mitigate first when a complaint arises before going to EPD.  
A council member asked who would implement this program for agriculture.  A  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 representative of the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission at the meeting 

said that the Commission already plays this role and does not receive many complaints on agriculture.  Council member Jimmy Champion suggested that the state Department of 
Agriculture could implement such a program, but other council members disagreed that the Department of Agriculture would be a good choice.   
 Council member T.E. Moye commented that this type of program would be good for 
agriculture, but Jimmy Webb said he thought such a program would create a new avenue for complaints.   
 Chairman Royal said he believed that the Council did not have consensus on this 
recommendation and asked for a vote.  The Council members voted 8 in favor and 4 against the recommendation; the recommendation was approved. 
 The next recommendation from the committee concerned management practice WQ4 on 
page 6-10 regarding water quality monitoring.  The committee recommended replacing the existing description of the management practice with the following:  
  T,   Increase the number of sampling sites and the frequency of sampling to 

build a better information base on water quality conditions to support improved resource assessments in the future.   
T,   Increase parameters sampled at each sampling location as needed to improve water quality database and future assessments.  
 Lee asked if there were any questions; there were no questions.  The Council accepted 
the committee's recommendation by consensus.   
The last recommendation from the committee concerned page 7-13 in Section 7.4.  Lee said that the committee recommended the addition of the following item to the list of 
information needs:  

\Gamma   Update water quality model assumptions in future resource assessments to reflect actual volumes treated by various wastewater treatment methods 

(e.g., land application, discharging facility). The assumption that current allocations among these methods will remain the same may not be accurate 
given instream flow concerns  
Lee asked if there were any questions; there were no questions.  The Council accepted the committee's recommendation by consensus. Kristin Rowles said that the new water 
quality modeling results will be reviewed after lunch.  
Plan Review Committee Report   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 The Plan Review Committee met on February 4, 2011.  A meeting summary was 

distributed as a hand-out. At its meeting, the committee discussed the January 21st draft and developed recommendations to the council for today's meeting. Kristin Rowles 
presented the committee's recommendations to the council.  
First, in Table 6-1, Kristin explained that she had taken a first try at noting the priorities of the management practices in the January 21st draft.  The priorities were rated as high, 
medium, and low and noted in the table by color coding (with a key in the table heading).  Kristin said that in discussion with the committee, it was decided to change the priorities 
to high and normal priority (2 categories instead of 3).  Kristin said that the assignment of priorities in the January 21st draft represented best guesses on her part and that she 
needed to collect input from the council to ensure that the assignments reflected their input.   
 She said she would distribute a hand-out on which members could indicate which 
management practices they thought should be marked as high priority.  The information collected from the council members on these worksheets would be used to discuss the 
assignment of priorities in the Plan Review Committee.  She said that the committee had discussed that priorities should be based on the importance of a management practice to 
attaining the council's vision and goals and to addressing identified gaps.   
Next, the committee recommended the addition of language to Section 6-2 (page 6-11) to clarify the groundwater model results (additions are underlined): 
  The identified gaps, including that in the Dougherty Plain aquifer, relate to the 

depletion of surface water flows in drought periods, as a result of consumptive use of surface water and groundwater. At many points in the period of record, the 
magnitude of these gaps is sufficiently large that it cannot be addressed without drastic suspension of consumptive water use, construction of large-scale storage, 
or both. The gap identified in Dougherty Plain aquifer results from the impact of groundwater use on surface water and does not reflect an adverse impact of 
groundwater use on aquifer levels; the model predicted drawdown in the aquifer of less than five feet.  
 Kristin said that this addition was to address a concern raised by council member John 
Bridges regarding the presentation of the groundwater model results. The Council accepted the committee's recommendation by consensus. 
 The next recommendation concerned Section 6.2 on page 6-12. The committee 
recommended the following modification (additions are underlined; deletions are marked by strike-through): 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 10  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
  As the planning process evolves, the Council recommends the development of more 

precise measures of the health of its water resources. Moreover, the Council emphasizes that the resource assessment models developed and used for this plan are 
planning tools; they should not be relied upon as policy tool. The Council makes further recommendations about information needs and resources assessment models 
This recommendation is explored further in Section 7.  
This modification was recommended to address a concern raised by council member John Heath that the gap would become a policy target.  The Council approved this 
recommended modification by consensus. The Council also continued its earlier discussion regarding the gap presentation. It was noted that the target flows used in the 
surface water availability assessment were defined by EPD.  However, the law provides for reasonable use of water.  The council members discussed whether a conflict exists 
between the assessment target and reasonable use as a policy.   
Council member Jimmy Webb said that the impact of the gap is unknown, and furthermore, he did not want to see the gap used against the state or water users in 
Georgia. Council member Huddy Hudgens said he did not think that the council should use the word "gap" in its plan.  John Heath noted that even with a sizable gap at 
Bainbridge, the state was still issuing permits for withdrawals in the region. Mark Masters (GWPPC) suggested that a measure of the gap could be the difference between 
consumptive use and reasonable use.  Chairman Royal said that the council needs to define the gap for itself and referred further discussion the Water Quantity Committee. 
 Chairman Royal asked if an Endangered Species Act enforcement action or litigation 
action arose, who would the action be taken against: EPD or water users?  Council member Mike Newberry said that the former EPD director had indicated that action 
would likely be taken against EPD.  Chairman Royal asked Tim Cash (EPD) if he had any comment; Cash replied that he had no comment. 
 The committee's next recommendation concerned the 4th bullet point on page 7-14 
(Section 7.4).  The following modification was recommended by the committee:  

Delete:  Revenue raising authority should be considered for these institutions.  
 Add:  
If a funding source is needed for these institutions, a regional sales tax would be preferred over a property tax as a potential revenue source.  
 Kristin explained that the committee had expressed concerns over new property taxes in 
the region. Some council members expressed concern that any revenue raising authority  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 would be considered. After a brief discussion, Chairman Royal referred this 

recommendation back to the Plan Review Committee for discussion and revision.  
The next recommendation concerned the joint recommendations developed at the joint council meeting with the Upper Flint and Middle Chattahoochee Councils on January 
27th.  The following three recommendations were presented for the council to consider for addition to Section 7.4 in a new sub-section highlighting coordinated 
recommendations with neighboring councils  

T,   The Upper Flint, Lower Flint-Ochlockonee, and Middle Chattahoochee Councils recognize the critical need for more storage in the Apalachicola-ChattahoocheeFlint (ACF) System and recommend that a plan for additional storage be developed and implemented and that it consider the following: better utilization of 
existing storage in the Chattahoochee, new storage in the Flint, and enhancement of existing storage capacity. 
T,   The Upper Flint, Lower Flint-Ochlockonee, and Middle Chattahoochee Councils urge GAEPD and those involved in the resource assessment modeling to improve 

upon existing models for future regional water planning by making greater use of actual and current data on water use and conditions and by developing 
assumptions that more closely approximate actual conditions.   T,   The Upper Flint, Lower Flint-Ochlockonee, and Middle Chattahoochee Councils 
request that state and federal agencies reevaluate the scientific justification for the minimum flow requirements at Woodruff Dam that are intended to maintain 
healthy aquatic ecosystems.  
In discussion of these shared recommendations, council member Greg Murray asked to have the 3rd item regarding the minimum flow requirements at Woodruff Dam deleted.  
He said that it was only likely that the targets would be increased, not decreased.  Tim Cash (EPD) said that the minimum targets at Woodruff are a range, not just a single 
number.  Council member Mike Newbery said that re-evaluating the flow targets could help or hurt, but scientific justification was important.  Council member Steve Bailey said 
that the 5000 cfs target was not a problem, but larger releases by the Corps were the problem.   
 Council vice-chair Hal Haddock asked the council to vote on adopting the joint 
recommendations, including the 3rd item.  The vote was eight in favor and eight against adoption (including the 3rd item). To break the tie, the vice-chair voted in favor of 
adopting the recommendations (including the 3rd item).  The Council adopted the joint recommendations for inclusion in Section 7.4. 
 Council member Mike Newberry asked for clarification on the change to Section 6.2. His 
question was answered, and he said he was fine with the recommendation as is.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
  

 Next, Chairman Royal asked the council if they felt comfortable enough with the plan to 
sign it. Council member T.E. Moye said that the council has spent a lot of time on the plan, and he is comfortable with it.  Council member Jimmy Webb said that the plan is 
better than doing nothing and having EPD write the plan. Council members generally indicated that they thought the plan was getting close to what it needed to be and that 
they were comfortable with it. Council member Huddy Hudgens said he thought it was possible that EPD would reject the plan; Chairman Royal disagreed. 
 In response to a question about the plan review process, Tim Cash said that the plan is 
scheduled to be distributed for public comment on May 9.  In response to general concerns expressed by Council members that they believed that EPD would make major 
revisions to the Council's plans before issuing them for public comment, he said that he thought that it would be unlikely for EPD to have the opportunity to do that since EPD 
would receive the plans on May 2 and then issue them for comment one week later.  The public comment period is likely to be 30-60 days.  EPD is preparing an online tool to 
collect public comments on the regional plans.    
Chairman Royal asked Cash how EPD will deal with comments and create a single final report.  Cash said that EPD was not planning to combine the individual regional plans 
into a single plan and that each of the regional plans will be stand-alone documents.    
A council member asked if the May 2 deadline was a legislative deadline; Cash said it is an EPD deadline. 
 Council member Huddy Hudgens asked if there will be a council meeting after the public 
comment period.  Cash said that there is not one planned now, but EPD is considering it.  He noted that there were budget constraints.  Chairman Royal said he thought that a 
council meeting following the public comment period would be necessary.  
Council member T.E. Moye noted that a non-regulatory agency should implement the complaint response program discussed in the Water Quality Committee Report earlier. 
 Lunch 
Steve Bailey offered a lunch blessing.  The Council broke for lunch at the Tarrer Inn.  
Technical Ad Hoc Committee Meeting Summary Kristin said this committee met on December 13, 2010 to evaluate information on water 
savings from agricultural irrigation efficiency practices. She said a meeting summary is provided in the pre-meeting packet material. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 13  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 Kristin said that the GWPPC had previously provided information to the Water Quantity 

Committee to estimate water savings associated with various practices. This information was used in the selection of management practices by the committee and council.  She 
said the group discussed these estimates, especially relative to a recent document distributed by the Flint River Basin Partnership that estimates relatively high levels of 
potential water savings from agricultural efficiency practices. Representatives of the Stripling Irrigation lab were at the committee meeting in order to help discuss the 
Partnership's estimates.  
Kristin said that the committee and the Stripling lab representatives were able to come to agreement on water savings estimates for agricultural practices.  The Partnership's 
estimates were not intended to be aggregated. The group agreed that 10-15% water savings was possible from current use levels (given what is currently known about actual 
levels of current conservation implementation and potential savings from various practices).  Kristin noted that the Satilla-Suwannee Council had developed a similar 
estimate (12.5%) for their region.  
Water Quality Modeling Update  
Steve Simpson provided an update concerning the water quality modeling. Steve reminded the council that the surface water quality modeling is about modeling the 
assimilative capacity of the waterbodies.  The assimilative capacity is the ability of the waterbodies to receive pollution without violating water quality standards.   
 Steve explained that the dissolved oxygen (DO) models are run at "critical conditions" 
(low flow, high temperature) with permitted discharges. He noted that the watershed models account for both wastewater discharges and storm water runoff from various land 
uses. Lake models look at the impacts of nutrients.  Steve said that models in general identify "unacceptable impacts" as not meeting state standards for dissolved oxygen, 
nutrients, chlorophyll a, etc.  
Steve said the results from the modeling can be overwhelming. There are many numeric results calculated for over 40 summation locations in the Flint basin.  Steve said for this 
presentation, key locations will be highlighted, including:  

\Gamma   Montezuma 
\Gamma   Lake Blackshear 
\Gamma   Below Lake Worth 
\Gamma   Bainbridge 
\Gamma   Spring Creek 
\Gamma   Fish Pond Drain  

Steve discussed the following graphs which show the contributions from point and non-point sources in pounds per year. Nitrogen and phosphorus trends are somewhat similar.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 14  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 

 Next, Steve showed selected nutrient modeling results on maps of the basin. For the Flint 
watershed, Steve said that, in general, nonpoint sources currently contribute more nutrients than point sources.  Future increases in nutrient loads will come from nonpoint 

contributions from changing land uses and significant increases in point source contributions. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 15  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 

  
Steve then summarized Lake Blackshear modeling results. He said that no nutrient standards were yet established for the lake. Phosphorus loading into lake is primarily 

from nonpoint sources.  Lake Seminole results are similar.  Seminole also has no nutrient standards yet established.  Phosphorus loading to Lake Seminole is primarily from 
nonpoint sources. Future phosphorus increases in Seminole will be primarily point source related. 
 Steve presented some potential Council considerations, including:  

T,   Dissolved Oxygen -  Increased flow will require increased treatment 
T,   Lake and Watershed Modeling  -  Modeling indicates types of management practices that might be most 

effective in reducing nutrients -  Relative contribution of point & nonpoint sources of nutrients  
-  Variability in results from year to year -  Comparison with existing water quality standards 
T,   Future Considerations -  Expanded data collection  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 16  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
  -  Modeling tool improvements for future updates 

-  Florida nutrient standards potential impacts  
In closing, Steve Simpson said that the results and the council's recommendations related to the results would be discussed at the next water quality committee meeting. 
 Energy Forecasts Follow-up Discussion 
 Kristin reminded the council that they had a presentation at the last council meeting on 
water demand forecasts for the energy sector.  For the region, she provided the following summary statistics on regional energy demand: 
 

  
 Kristin reminded the council that for the statewide energy demand forecasts, the location 

of additional capacity (beyond 2020) was not specified because it was unknown.  She asked if the council would like to address the unallocated capacity in its plan.  Concern 
was noted with additional water consumption in the region given identified flow shortfalls.  Chairman Royal asked if anyone would like to address this issue in the plan;  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 17  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 the council agreed that the allocation of future generating capacity did not need to be 

directly addressed in Section 4.4.  
Shared Resources Discussion  
Kristin said that there was a need for discussion of water resources shared with the Suwannee-Satilla Council in the small area of this council's region that falls in the 
Suwannee Basin.  Information to support this discussion is being developed, and it will be discussed at the next council meeting.  There may be an interim small group meeting 
with some council members to go over this information.  Kristin will work with the chairman to identify participants, if needed.  Council members Terry Clark, Bill Yearta, 
and Will Vereen were nominated by other council members to participate because they live in that part of the region. 
 Review of Outstanding Issues/Plan to Finalize WDCP for May 2nd  
Submittal to EPD  
Kristin said that the next Council meeting will be in mid-April, prior to the May 2nd submittal of the regional water plan to EPD for release to public comment. After the 
council meeting, the Plan Review Committee can determine how to deal with loose ends in finalizing the plan (with full council involvement by e-mail or phone if needed). 
 Next, Kristin reviewed the committee work that would happen before the next council 
meeting:  
Water Quality Committee: Modeling results and implications to the plan will be discussed.  
 Water Quantity Committee: Gap definition discussion (also: interbasin transfer 
recommendation, see below)  
Plan Review Committee: Management practices prioritization, Section 7.4: revision to recommendation regarding water management institutions and revenue generating 
capabilities; review of sections 7 & 8.  
Kristin said that she would distribute a revised draft plan in the week of February 28th for use in committee discussions.  She suggested committee meetings approximately as 
follows:  Week of February 28th: Water Quality Committee 
Week of March 7th: Water Quantity Committee Week of March 14th: Plan Review Committee, Water Quality Committee 
Week of March 21st: Water Quantity Committee (if needed) Weeks of March 28th/April 4th: Committee meeting as needed  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 18  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
  

The Council selected April 19th for the next Council meeting.  The meeting will be held in Camilla. 
 Next, the Council discussed who would serve on the committee to meet with the U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service about the Endangered Species Act issues.  The following members were identified: T.E. Moye, Jerry Lee, Jimmy Webb, and John Bridges.  Kristin 
will set up the meeting.  
Kristin asked the council if there were any other issues that need to be addressed by the Council before the May 2nd submittal of the plan.  
 Council member Steve Sykes expressed concern about the Council's recommendation on 
interbasin transfers.  He said that the Council did not oppose transfers out of the region and that is a concern.  After some discussion, it was suggested that the council consider 
amending its recommendation to oppose interbasin transfers out of the region. The Water Quantity Committee will consider this modification. 
 Local Elected Official and Public Comments 
 Council member Steve Bailey introduced Frank Yancey from the Golden Triangle 
Resource Conservation and Development Council.  Bailey is a board member for the council.  The council has a proposal for a 319 grant for this region that Bailey 
recommended to the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Council for support.  EPD has asked the regional water councils to assist in the identification of 319 projects in their region that 
will assist in attaining the regional council's vision and goals.    
Frank Yancey described the work of the Golden Triangle RC&D.  He explained that RC&D's efforts to implement best management practices for dirt roads through its Better 
Back Roads program.  He said that the RC&D has a specific "shovel-ready" Better Back Roads project identified for the Spring Creek area in Seminole County that would address 
an identified water quality concern.  He said that the RC&D plans to submit this project as a proposal to EPD's 319 grant program. 
 Chairman Royal said that the council could support this project, and the council members 
approved by unanimous consensus. Bill Morris of EPD was asked what was needed to indicate the council's support; Morris will check.  Chairman Royal offered to send a 
letter.  If needed, the council can add specific reference to the project in the plan (management practice WQ2).  Because Spring Creek is identified critical habitat for 
listed species of freshwater mussels, Chairman Royal asked that the letter of support for the project be copied to Sandy Tucker of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
 There were no other comments from local elected officials or the public.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 19  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
  

 Wrap Up/CM10 Preview/Council Meeting 9 Evaluation 
 The next council meeting will be April 19th in Camilla.  Kristin will send a new plan draft 
during the week of February 28th.  Committee members will soon be notified about upcoming committee meetings.  An evaluation form for today's meeting was distributed 
to council members.  The meeting was adjourned.  
     

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 20  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 16, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 Attachment 1:  

Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  Council Meeting Attendance - February 10, 2011 
 Council Members 
      Steve Bailey John Bridges 

Jimmy Champion Jerry Chapman 
Hal Haddock John Heath 
Josh Herring Huddy Hudgens 
Gary Leddon Jerry Lee 

Chuck Lingle George McIntosh 
T.E. Moye Greg Murray 
Mike Newberry Jim Quinn 
Richard Royal Howard Small 
Steve Sykes Jimmy Webb
  

Council Members Not In Attendance  John Bulloch 
Dean Burke Terry Clark 
Bob Hanner Chris Hobby 

Doyle Medders Rick Moss 
Steve Singletary Will Vereen 
Bill Yearta  
Planning Consultants    Steve Simpson, B&V 
Robert Osborne, B&V  Mark Masters, GWPPC Kristin Rowles, GWPPC   
Georgia EPD  Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  
Bill Morris  

 Georgia State Agencies 
Luke Crosson, GASWCC Jason Wisniewski, GA DNR Wildlife 
Resources Division  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 21  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting   February 15, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 21  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting   February 15, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011 
 

   Robert Osborne 8 32 11 2 2 111 3 60 0  -18000 MEETING MINUTES LFO_CM9_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 8.1 for Word 