 

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 22, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011 
 motion.  The  Council  did  not  yet  have  a  quorum  and  delayed  further  discussion  on  the 

motion until a quorum was present.  
Plan Process/Timeline & Overview of Plan Revisions  
Kristin  reviewed  slides  (available  on  website)  that  presented  the  Council  timeline  and reviewed changes to the plan in the April 12th review draft.  She discussed the Executive 
Summary  (forthcoming)  and  supplement  documents  (hand-out  with list  of  supplemental documents provided).  She also reviewed the public comment process and a new Internetbased  comment  collection  tool  that  will  be  used  by  GAEPD  in  the  public  comment process.  A  hand-out  about  the  comment  collection  website  was  distributed.    Council 
members  can  use  the  on-line  comment  collection  tool  to  view  comments  made  on  the plan.  Council members can also make their own comments on the plan.  To use the online comment collection tool, users need to register on the Internet site. In addition to the Internet site, comments can be submitted by e-mail, fax, or mail. 
 Water Quantity Committee Report and Recommendations 
 Committee  Chairman  Jimmy  Webb thanked  the  committee  for  its  work.  Webb  reported 
to  the  Council  on  a  meeting  with  USFWS  regarding  endangered  species  issues  in  the region.  A summary of the meeting is in the pre-meeting packet. Jimmy said USFWS was 
willing  to  work  with  area  farmers  to  develop  strategies  to  protect  habitat  as  well  as 
\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Theta \Pi \Sigma  water  use.    Webb  said  he  \Gamma \Xi \Upsilon \Phi  \Phi \Psi \Delta \Phi  \Phi \Psi \Xi \Theta \Xi  \Omega \Delta \Sigma  fffi\Omega  \Delta ff flfiffi\Xi ff fflfifi\Theta i j\Xi \Phi \Omega \Xi \Xi ffGAEPD, the Council, and USFWS.  Tim Cash thanked the Council for its work on this 

issue.  Webb said that Sandy Tucker (USFWS) had been in contact with Director Barnes (GAEPD)  regarding  a  Habitat  Conservation  Plan  in  the  Lower  Flint.  The  group  agreed 
that  ultimately  EPD  would  have  to  play  a  role  as  the  permitting  authority  in  the  state. Richard  Royal  told  the  Council  that  he  has  met  with  Barnes  and  Tucker  and  will  meet 
with them again on Friday, April 22.  Barnes has said he will seek funding to determine if an HCP is necessary. 
 At this time, with the arrival of one more Council member, a quorum was present.  The 
Council  took  up  business  from  the  beginning  of  the  meeting.    First,  the  Council unanimously  approved  the  motion  made  by  George  McIntosh  requesting  that  EPD 
notify the Council of any revisions and provide the Council an opportunity to meet and respond to any revisions.  Next, the Council approved the meeting summary from the 
`'^* _*,ss_ae` oeo/o/*aessAE 'ssOE *O/o/ 'AEo/ssOE' *! **OE'"#^ oeo/o/*aessAE $" unanimous consensus.  
Webb  tu\Theta ff\Xi ffl \Phi \Psi \Xi  %fi\Lambda \Lambda &\Phi \Phi \Xi \Xi  \Theta \Xi ffifi\Theta \Phi  fi'\Xi \Theta  \Phi fi (\Theta &\Sigma \Phi &ff \Phi fi \Theta \Xi '&\Xi \Omega  \Phi \Psi \Xi  %fi\Lambda \Lambda &\Phi \Phi \Xi \Xi \Pi \Sigma recommendations  for  plan  revisions. 

(\Theta &\Sigma \Phi &ff \Theta \Xi '&\Xi \Omega \Xi ffl \Sigma \Upsilon &ffl\Xi \Sigma  \Omega &\Phi \Psi  \Phi \Psi \Xi  %fi\Lambda \Lambda &\Phi \Phi \Xi \Xi \Pi \Sigma recommendations.   Regarding  plan  revisions  addressing  Endangered  Species Act  (ESA) 

concerns, the committee recommended:   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 22, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011 
 

\Gamma   Addition of a Footnote #7 on page 2-5 to reference ESA-related discussion and recommendations in other parts of plan 

\Gamma   Adoption of Option 2 on page 6-2 
\Gamma   Adoption of Option 2 on page 7-16, with modification of the 2nd sentence so that it reads: 

\Delta The Council urges all appropriate state agencies to join in this process, 
\Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Sigma \Upsilon \Theta \Lambda \Phi  \Psi \Omega ff fiflffiffli  

jff\Phi `'\Upsilon \Theta \Lambda \Phi  \Psi \Omega ff \Delta \Phi `^i \Pi `\Lambda \Phi \Sigma `\Phi ff* \Psi \Omega ff \Xi _**\Theta \Psi \Psi ffff ,\Theta 'ss\Psi  'ff\Xi _**ff\Lambda \Upsilon ff\Upsilon  \Psi \Omega ff `\Upsilon \Upsilon \Theta \Psi \Theta _\Lambda  _, ` new final paragraph for Section 5.4on pages 5-8 & 5-9 (neither of the options presented in the 
April 12th draft) to read as follows:  

The Lower FlintaeOchlockonee Council questions whether the criteria used to 
\Upsilon ff\Psi ff'*\Theta \Lambda ff \Delta \Phi `^ssi ,_' ss\Sigma ',`\Xi ff oe`\Psi ff' ,\Pi _oess o/`ss \Upsilon ff,\Theta \Lambda ff\Upsilon  \Theta \Lambda  \Psi \Omega ff 'ffss_\Sigma '\Xi ffassessment  models)  are  appropriate  metrics  by  which  to  evaluate  the 

\Theta *^`\Xi \Psi ss _, \Xi _\Lambda ss\Sigma *^\Psi \Theta AEff oe`\Psi ff' \Sigma ssff _\Lambda  \Psi \Omega ff ss\Psi `\Psi ffOEss oe`\Psi ff' 'ffss_\Sigma '\Xi ffssffl O/\Omega ff \Delta \Phi `^ssido not provide for reasonable use by lawfully permitted users. Moreover, the 
\Delta \Phi `^ssi `'ff \Lambda _\Psi  \Upsilon ff,\Theta \Lambda ff\Upsilon  \Theta \Lambda  \Psi ff'*ss _, `\Lambda  \Upsilon ff*_\Lambda ss\Psi '`!\Pi ff ff\Lambda AE\Theta '_\Lambda *ff\Lambda \Psi `\Pi  \Omega `'*ffl The Council disagr

ffffss oe\Theta \Psi \Omega  \Psi \Omega ff `^^'_`\Xi \Omega  \Psi _ \Theta \Upsilon ff\Lambda \Psi \Theta ,\Theta \Lambda \Phi  \Delta \Phi `^ssi \Sigma ssff\Upsilon  \Theta \Lambda  \Psi \Omega \Theta ssplanning process because: 

(a) a gap is not defined by impacts on aquatic health or downstream users;  (b) it is not clear what the impacts of a gap are; 
(c) gaps occur as a result of use that has already been legally permitted in the region; and  
(d) the modeled gap cannot be closed through demand management even with complete cessation of consumptive water use when a gap occurs. 
Moreover,  assumptions  used  in  the  resource  assessment  model  regarding upstream  withdrawals  for  reservoirs  result  in  a  gap  that  is  overestimated 
relative to actual use.  
"\Pi _ss\Theta \Lambda \Phi  \Psi \Omega ff \Theta \Upsilon ff\Lambda \Psi \Theta ,\Theta ff\Upsilon  \Delta \Phi `^ssi \Xi _\Sigma \Pi \Upsilon  \Sigma \Pi \Psi \Theta *`\Psi ff\Pi  \Xi `\Sigma ssff ss\Theta \Phi \Lambda \Theta ,\Theta \Xi `\Lambda \Psi  \Omega `'* \Psi _ \Psi \Omega ff
'ff\Phi \Theta _\Lambda OEss ff\Xi _\Lambda _* `\Lambda \Upsilon  oe_\Sigma \Pi \Upsilon  !ff \Xi _\Sigma \Lambda \Psi ff' \Psi _ \Psi \Omega ff "_\Sigma \Lambda \Xi \Theta \Pi OEss #\Theta ss\Theta _\Lambda ss `\Lambda \Upsilon  $_`\Pi ss(i.e.,  su

^^_'\Psi \Theta \Lambda \Phi  \Psi \Omega ff 'ff\Phi \Theta _\Lambda OEss ff\Xi _\Lambda _** ff\Lambda ss\Sigma '\Theta \Lambda \Phi  `\Xi \Xi ffssss \Psi _ oe`\Psi ff' 'ffss_\Sigma '\Xi ffssfor  existing  and  future  water  users,  maintaining  the 

productionaeagricultureaebased  economy  of  the  region,  and  supporting sustainable  economic  growth  in  the  region).  Therefore,  the  Council  insists 
that  no  modifications  to  existing  water  withdrawal  permitting  practices  be enacted  based  on  the  resource  assessment  model  results.  The  Council 
recommends  additional  study  to  determine  more  appropriate  flow  targets that  account  for  permitted  reasonable  use  and  demonstrable  environmental 
impacts for use in future planning.  
The  committee  met  to  finalize  this  recommendation  this  morning.  The  committee also recommended:   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 22, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011 
 

\Gamma   \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Sigma \Pi \Upsilon \Lambda \Phi \Pi \Psi \Omega  \Psi \Sigma  ff\Lambda fifl \Phi ffi\Xi \Psi fflffffi\Psi ffl\Phi  fi\Theta \Lambda \Omega  \Lambda fl i\Psi j`\Theta  \Xi `flffl\Theta \Phi fl '^ff\Lambda fi \Pi j`\Omega \Phi \Pi \Sigma \Pi `j *_

\Phi ffi` i\Psi j`\Theta *, 
ss  Addition of the last bullet item on page 7-15: The Council recommends that no  modifications  to  existing  water  withdrawal  permitting  practices  be 

enacted based on the surface water availability and groundwater availability resource  assessment  model  results.  For  a  more  complete  discussion  of  the 
\Delta \Psi ffl\Omega \Upsilon \Pi \Theta aefl \Upsilon \Psi \Omega \Upsilon `\Xi \Omega fl oe\Pi \Phi ffi \Phi ffi` i\Psi j`\Theta \Pi \Omega ff \Lambda fifi\Xi \Psi \Lambda \Upsilon ffi`fl \Lambda \Omega j \Xi `flffl\Theta \Phi flo/ fi\Theta `\Lambda fl` fl``page 5-6. [new draft will have updated page number]

  

Regarding  interbasin  transfers,  the  committee  recommended  the  addition  of  a  new  final sentence  to  the  third  bullet  item  on  page  7-15  to  address  a  concern  raised  at  the  last 
\Delta \Psi ffl\Omega \Upsilon \Pi \Theta  i``\Phi \Pi \Omega ffAE OEffi` \Omega `oe fl`\Omega \Phi `\Omega \Upsilon ` flffi\Psi ffl\Theta j \Xi `\Lambda jO/ ^However,  the  Council  recommends against  any  new  interbasin  transfers  from  any  basin  for  which  this  planning  process 
identified concerns about maintaining a sustainable in-stream flow regime.*  
Next, Kristin reviewed the plan revisions to address the new groundwater results for the Claiborne  aquifer,  for  which  the  model  was  recalibrated  using  more  up-to-date  use 
information.  Kristin  said  that  the  explanation  of  the  groundwater  results  had  also  been clarified  and  improved  in  Sections  3.2.2  and  5.3.    The  committee  has  reviewed  these 
revisions and recommends them for adoption by the Council.  
\Phi  \Phi ffi` \Upsilon \Psi \Omega \Upsilon \Theta fflfl\Pi \Psi \Omega  \Psi \Sigma  !\Xi \Pi fl\Phi \Pi \Omega aefl \Xi `"\Pi `oe \Psi \Sigma  \Phi ffi` \Upsilon \Psi ii\Pi \Phi \Phi ``aefl \Xi `\Upsilon \Psi ii`\Omega j`j \Xi `"\Pi fl\Pi \Psi \Omega flo/ Webb made  a  motion  that  the  Council  adopt  the  changes  to  the  plan  recommended  by  the 
Water  Quantity  Committee.  John  Heath  seco#$%$ &'% ()&*)#+ ,'% -)((*&&%%./recommendations were adopted by the Council by unanimous consensus. 
 Next, John Bridges made a motion that a new sentence be added at the end of the first 
paragraph  on  page  6-00 123&%4 &'% 5)4$/ 6)3 7%// &'2# 3*8% 3%%&+9:; 6!)4%)8%4= &'%Upper  Floridan  aquifer  in  this  region  is  known  to  recover  quickly  as  a  result  of 
4%-'24?%+9 The  motion  was  seconded  by  Huddy  Hudgens.  This  revision  was  adopted by the Council by unanimous consensus. 
 Water Quality Committee Report and Recommendations 
 Committee  chair  Jerry  Lee  could  not  attend  today  due  to  a  family  medical  emergency. 
Kristin Rowles gave his report. She said that the committee had met twice since the last Council meeting.  A summary of the March 15th committee meeting is in the pre-meeting 
packet.  A  summary  of  the  April  11th  committee  meeting  was  distributed  as  a  hand-out.  The committee reviewed new water quality modeling results on nutrient loading and how 
these results are presented in the plan.  The committee also discussed outstanding issues 
\Lambda \Omega j \Sigma \Pi \Omega \Lambda \Theta \Pi ?\Pi \Omega ff \Phi ffi` fi\Theta \Lambda \Omega AE @ffi` \Xi `"\Pi `oe`j fl\Theta \Pi j`fl oe\Pi \Phi ffi \Phi ffi` \Upsilon \Psi ii\Pi \Phi \Phi ``aefl \Xi `\Upsilon \Psi ii`\Omega j\Lambda \Phi \Pi \Psi \Omega fl \Sigma \Psi \Xi plan revisions. 

  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 22, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011 
 First, the  committee had  asked  for  a  better explanation  of  the Ochlockonee  assimilative 

capacity  results  in  the  plan.    The  Ochlockonee  goes  from  13.77  miles  with  assimilative capacity concerns in 2010 to 0 miles with concerns in 2050.  Kristin explained that this 
result occurred only after modifications were made to existing permit requirements in the model.  The text was modified to explain this better, as follows (Page 5-5, 2nd paragraph): 
  In the Ochlockonee, the model projected that the number of stream miles 

where assimilative capacity is exceeded or unavailable will decrease from 13.77 miles to 0 miles over the same period. It is important to note, 
however, that the Ochlockonee results were attained after modifications were made to assumptions about 2050 permit limits and discharge volumes 
for several NPDES dischargers in the Basin, including BASF, Boston, Doerun, Moultrie, and Affinity Foods. These modifications were made to 
address assimilative capacity concerns under projected 2050 conditions. EPD will modify permit limits for any NPDES permit when assimilative 
capacity is exceeded, and therefore, this type of permit modification would be expected. 
 The committee recommends adoption of this revision, as presented in the April 12th draft. 
 Next, the committee recommends the addition of the following as a new bullet item in the 
list of uncertainties affecting plan implementation on page 6-3:    

\Gamma   Legal challenge to the Tired Creek Reservoir in Grady County: The permit issued  by  the  USACOE  for  a  new  reservoir  on  a  tributary  to  the 

Ochlockonee  River  has  been  challenged  by  several  stakeholder organizations  and  a  county  downstream  in  Florida.  The  litigants  are 
concerned  over  wetland  and  water  quality  impacts  of  the  reservoir.  The litigation  has  implications  for  water  resource  management  in  the 
Ochlockonee  River  Basin  and  in  the  relationship  between  Georgia  and Florida over shared water resources. 
 The committee recommends adoption of this revision, as presented in April 12th review 
draft.  
Kristin  said  that  in  addition  to  these  proposed  revisions,  the  committee  had  also Committee also reviewed the plan

\Delta \Theta  explanation of new water quality modeling results on nutrient  loading.    Additionally,  a  letter  of  support  from  the  Council  for  the  Golden 

Triangle  RC&D  319  grant  proposal  was  sent,  as  approved  at  the  last  Council  meeting.  (See page 34 of the pre-meeting packet.) 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 22, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011 
 Chuck Lingle made a motion to approve the revisions to the plan recommended by the 

Water  Quality  Committee.    John  Heath  seconded  the  motion.    The  motion  was approved by unanimous consensus of the Council. 
 Plan Review Committee Report and Recommendations 
 Kristin said that 

\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Sigma  \Gamma \Upsilon \Phi \Xi \Psi  \Xi \Omega fffi\Sigma  \Lambda fi\Pi  fl\Upsilon  ffi\Pi \Upsilon ffl\Delta \Sigma fi fl\Lambda fi i\Psi \Xi j \Gamma fiffl\Delta fi` '\Upsilon ^^\Delta flflfifi*\Omega  \Pi fiffi\Upsilon \Pi fland  recommendations.  Kristin  said  that  the  committee  met  on  March  31st.  A  meeting 

summary  is  included  in  the  pre-meeting  packet.  The  committee  reviewed  the  March  8th draft, with an emphasis on Sections 7 & 8.  The committee also discussed how to address 
comments on Section 3 received from the Division of Wildlife Resources (a division of Georgia Department of Natural Resources). 
 First,  Kristin  said  that  Table  6-1  had  been  modified  so  that  high  priority  practices  are 
listed at the top of each section in the Table.  The priorities noted in the April 12th review draft reflect the results of the survey on priorities at the last Council meeting. 
 Next,  Kristin  reviewed  recommended  revisions  to  address  the  comments  received  from 
the Division of Wildlife Resources (DWR) on Section 3 of the plan. The DWR comments are  included  in  the  pre-meeting  packet  (see  pages  44-47).  Page  3-14  of  the  April  12th 
review draft reflects the modifications to address the DWR comments.  Additionally, the list  of  rare  aquatic  species  from  the  DWR  comments  (see  page  46  of  the  pre-meeting 
packet) will be added to a supplemental document to the plan.   
Next,  Kristin  reviewed  suggested  revisions  in  Section  7.4.    On  page  7-17,  the  second 
\Upsilon ffifl\Delta \Upsilon j \Pi fi_\Psi fi\Theta fl\Omega  fl\Lambda fi \Theta \Upsilon ^^\Delta flflfifi*\Omega  \Sigma \Delta \Omega \Theta *\Omega \Omega \Delta \Upsilon j \Upsilon j \Pi fifflfij*fi \Pi \Xi \Delta \Omega \Delta j, ss\Phi  fl\Lambda fi '\Upsilon *j\Theta \Delta \Psi \Omega ae oe\Pi \Delta \Omega fl\Delta j
\Omega \Xi \Delta \Sigma  fl\Lambda \Xi fl fl\Lambda fi \Psi \Xi j,*\Xi ,fi \Lambda \Xi \Sigma  \Xi \Psi \Omega \Upsilon  ssfifij ^\Upsilon \Sigma \Delta _\Delta fi\Sigma  fl\Upsilon  \Theta \Psi \Xi \Pi \Delta _\Phi  fl\Lambda fi '\Upsilon *j\Theta \Delta \Psi *\Omega  ffi\Upsilon \Omega \Delta fl\Delta \Upsilon jae o/he Council discussed the issue of whether, in the future, regional water councils should have 

revenue raising authority. It was noted that the Florida water management districts have taxing  authority.  It  was  also  noted  that  this  is  an  issue  of  more  vs.  less  government.  A 
Council member said that water decisions should be kept local. No changes were made, and Option 2 was recommended. 
 On  page  7-18,  Kristin  said  that  she  was  suggesting  a  revision  that  the  Plan  Review 
Committee  had  not  been  able  to  address  because  it  did  not  meet  a  second  time.  The 
\Pi fiffl\Delta \Omega \Delta \Upsilon j \Theta \Psi \Xi \Pi \Delta _\Delta fi\Sigma  fl\Lambda fi '\Upsilon *j\Theta \Delta \Psi *\Omega  ffi\Upsilon \Omega \Delta fl\Delta \Upsilon j \Upsilon j \Delta jflfi\Pi \Omega fl\Xi flfi \Delta \Omega \Omega *fi\Omega ae AEffifl\Delta \Upsilon j OE `\Xi \Omega  \Pi fi\Theta \Upsilon ^^fij\Sigma fi\Sigma ae  

On  page  7-19,  the  first  bullet  item  at  the  top  of  the  page  was  formerly  in  the  plan  as management practice WQ5.  Kristin said that it had been moved to Section 7.4 before it 
concerned  coordination  among  regional  water  councils,  and  therefore,  its  scope  was broader  than  Water  Quality.    This  revision  was  reviewed  with  the  Water  Quality 
Committee.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 22, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011 
 Richard Royal asked if there were any objections to adopting the revisions presented in 

the  Plan  Review  Committee  report.    The  Council  adopted  the  recommended  revisions by unanimous consensus. 
 
Local Elected Official and Public Comments  

Next,  the  Council  provided  time  for  local  elected  officials  and  the  general  public  to address the council, but no one indicated that they would like to speak. 
 
Final Discussion of Plan/Adoption of Plan for Submittal to EPD  

Kristin asked if the Council had anything further to discuss before considering adoption of the plan.  The Council did not have any further items to discuss. 
 Richard Royal indicated that it was time for the Council to act on adoption of the plan for 
submittal to EPD. \Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Theta  \Xi \Pi \Sigma \Upsilon \Theta \Phi  \Psi \Pi \Omega \Theta  \Pi  \Psi ff\Delta \Sigma fffi \Delta ff \Pi \Omega fffl\Delta  \Delta ffi\Theta  fl\Upsilon \Pi fiffl \Pi i j\Theta \Lambda \Sigma i\Theta \Omega  \Sigma fi \Delta ff\Omega \Pi \Phi `imeeting, for submittal as the recommended regional water plan to EPD.  John Bridges 
seconded  the  motion.    The  motion  was  approved  by  unanimous  consensus  of  the Council. 
 Richard  Royal  thanked  Black  and  Veatch  and  EPD.    He  acknowledged  Kristin  Rowles 
for  her  work  on  the  plan.  Chuck  Lingle  thanked  Chairman  Royal  and  Vice  Chair Haddock  for their service to the Council.  George McIntosh thanked the  Georgia Water 
Planning  and  Policy  Center  for  its  assistance.  Tim  Cash  thanked  the  Council  for  its efforts  and  said  he  had  learned  a  lot  from  the  Council.  Woody  Hicks  (Jones  Center) 
thanked the Council for its efforts to balance the environment and the economy.  George McIntosh  noted  that  over  2500  hours  of  work  had  been  put  into  the  plan  by  council 
members.  Richard  Royal  commended  the  Council  for  its  efforts.  The  meeting  was adjourned. 
  
  
    

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 22, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011 
 Attachment 1:  

Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  Council Meeting Attendance 

\Gamma  April 19, 2011  

Council Members       Steve Bailey 
John Bridges Jimmy Champion 
Hal Haddock John Heath 
Huddy Hudgens Gary Leddon 
Chuck Lingle George McIntosh  

Rick Moss Greg Murray 
Mike Newberry Richard Royal 
Steve Singletary Howard Small 
Steve Sykes Jimmy Webb

  

Council Members Not In Attendance  John Bulloch 
Dean Burke Jerry Chapman  
Terry Clark Bob Hanner 
Josh Herring Chris Hobby 

Jerry Lee Doyle Medders 
T.E. Moye Jim Quinn 
Will Vereen Bill Yearta 

 Planning Consultants    
Steve Simpson, B&V Mark Masters, GWPPC  Kristin Rowles, GWPPC  Doug Wilson, GWPPC 
 Georgia EPD  
Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  Bill Morris 
  
Georgia State Agencies   Robert Osborne 20 8 14 10 4 111 2 129 1 EDT NA MEETING MINUTES LFO_CM10_Summary.pdf en  