

Georgia Department of Natural Resources 

Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 

Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 FAX: 404/675-6247  

  
April 26, 2011  
M E M O R A N D U M  
 TO:    Council Members  
     FROM:  David Ashley, Jacobs/JJG  

Tai-Yi Su, Jacobs/JJG  Charlotte Weber, Jacobs/JJG 
 SUBJECT:  CM#10 Meeting Summary  

Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council   
CC:    Kevin Farrell, GA EPD  Ted Hendrickx, GA EPD 
          
Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan Middle Ocmulgee Regional Water Planning Council 
 Council Meeting 10 Summary 
 Meeting Date:  April 14, 2011 
Location:    GEMC Training Center, Smarr, Georgia  
1.  Welcome & Introductions   
Chairman Elmo Richardson welcomed the group and thanked them for their attendance.  
David Ashley announced that there had been some changes to the agenda since the drafts were issued prior to the meeting, and directed the Council members to the hard copies provided in the 
meeting  handouts.    The  revised  agenda  include  discussions  on  1)  additional  outreach  activities 
\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Lambda \Xi \Pi  \Sigma \Upsilon  \Phi \Psi \Omega ff \Theta \Lambda \Pi  fifl \Phi \Psi \Omega ffiffl \Gamma i\Sigma \Delta j` `'^^\Xi \Lambda *j\Lambda _ *''\Delta * ,\Xi `*j'\Lambda  ss \Theta \Delta ffl' ae\Theta ffl \Sigma \Xi \Xi \Lambda  oe\Xi o/jffl\Xi \Pi  *'include  comments  from  the  Wildlife  Resource Division  (WRD) and  a  hard copy  of  the  revised 

section is included in the meeting handouts.  
2.   Committee Updates/319 Grant Recommendations   

Meeting Summary  
Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #10 

 April 26, 2011 

 

2 
 

Committee Updates Chairman  Richardson  introduced  Council  member  Tony  Rojas  to  give  an  update  on  Technical 
Sub-committee Meetings.  
Rojas  stated  that  the  sub-committee  had  6-8  meetings  in  person  and  via  conference  calls.    The last meeting (March 24, 2011) was to review the revised draft plan that incorporated council and 
agency  comments  received.    Support  staff  from  Jacobs  and  EPD  were  present  at  this  meeting.  
\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi  \Pi \Sigma \Xi \Upsilon \Phi \Xi \Xi \Psi \Pi  \Omega ff\Psi  \Upsilon \Delta fifi\Sigma \Omega \Omega \Psi \Psi fl\Xi  ffi\Psi ffl\Sigma \Psi i jffi\Delta \Upsilon \Psi \Xi \Xi ` \Lambda '\Pi  \Xi \Omega \Lambda \Omega \Psi \Pi  \Omega ff\Lambda \Omega  \Omega ff\Psi ^ ffi\Psi ffl\Sigma \Psi i\Psi \Pi  \Psi \Lambda \Upsilon ff \Upsilon \Delta fifi\Psi '\Omega that was received, discussed suggested responses, and voted on suggested edits.  In most cases, 

the Technical Committee was able to get consensus on suggested edits.  
Ashley noted that the resulting document revision would be reviewed later in the meeting.  
Rojas expressed gratitude to the technical subcommittee members for their efforts in this review process.  Chairman Richardson also thanked the committee  members for their participation and 
hard work.  
Section 319 Grant Update Chairman  Richardson  introduced  Mike  Hopkins  from  Newton  County  Water  and  Sewerage 
Authority  (NCWSA)  to  provide  the  Council  with  a  319  grant  update.    Hopkins  thanked  the Council  for  their  support  of  this  project,  and  he provided  a  brief  overview  of  the  project.    The 
project location is in the Little River headwaters, which begins in Walton County, then flows to Newton County.  Three miles of the Little River are on 303(d) list for fecal coliform impairment.  
The goal of the project is reduction of fecal coliform levels to below the 2003 TMDL.  Project elements include education, monitoring, BMPs, and environmental ordinances. 
 Ashley  reminded  the  Council  of  the  selection  process  for  this  project.    EPD  obtained 
approximately  $1  Million  to  implement  Council-recommended  319  projects.    This  equates  to approximately $100,000 per Council.  Section 319 is a non-point source grant program, and the 
Council  is  happy  to  take  advantage  of  these  funds.    To  be  considered  for  Section  319  funding projects  had to  be  ready  to  go,  and Newton  County stepped  forward  with  this project  that  they 
had  already  prepared  for  grant  submittal.    Ashley  noted  that  the  project  description  was forwarded  to  the  Council  for  their  approval  via  e-mail  voting  in  January  2011.    The  Planning 
Contractor received a total of 19 votes supporting the project.  Ashley indicated that funds should be available to NCWSA at the start of Federal fiscal year, around October 1st.  
 3.   Local Government and Utility Outreach Meetings Update/Additional Outreach 
 Local Government and Utility Information Meetings 
Charlotte Weber reviewed the Council outreach meetings that had been  held since the previous Council  meeting.    Local  Government  and  Utility  Information  Meetings  were  held  on  February 
24th in Jackson and February 28th in Warner Robins.  Weber thanked Marianne Golmitz (City of Warner Robins) and Marcie Seleb (Butts County Water and Sewerage Authority) for their help 
in setting these meetings up.    
Weber indicated the purpose of these meetings was to review the Draft Regional Water Plan and     

Meeting Summary  
Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #10 

 April 26, 2011 

 

6 
 

\Gamma \Delta  \Theta \Lambda  \Xi \Pi \Sigma \Xi \Upsilon \Phi \Psi \Lambda \Sigma  \Psi \Omega \Phi \Psi  \Omega \Lambda  \Psi \Omega fffifl\Omega \Psi  \Psi \Omega \Lambda  \Psi \Lambda \Upsilon \Omega \Pi \Xi \Upsilon \Phi ffi \Upsilon fffflffl\Xi \Psi \Psi \Lambda \Lambda ij `\Lambda \Upsilon fffflffl\Lambda \Pi \Sigma \Phi \Psi \Xi ff\Pi  '\Phi j \Psi ff ffi\Lambda \Phi ^\Lambda  \Psi \Omega \Xi jissue  to  State  and  Federal  policy.    Rojas  expressed  concern  about  putting  the  burden  of 
measuring these contaminants on the region or state without an EPA policy in place to show that these constituents will be of future concern.  He stated that while individual utilities in the region 
may  have  concerns  about  emerging  contaminants,  they  can  still  choose  to  monitor  these constituents independently without including this language within the plan. 
A:  McSwain noted that current language does not commit communities to monitoring. Comment

* _\Omega \Phi \Xi `ffl\Phi \Pi  *\Xi \Upsilon \Omega \Phi `\Sigma jff\Pi  jfiflfl\Lambda j\Psi \Lambda \Sigma  \Upsilon \Omega \Phi \Pi fl\Xi \Pi fl ffi\Phi \Pi flfi\Phi fl\Lambda  \Psi ff ,ss\Pi \Upsilon fffi`\Phi fl\Lambda  \Phi \Sigma \Sigma \Xi \Psi \Xi ff\Pi \Phi ffi
`\Lambda j\Lambda \Phi `\Upsilon \Omega  ff\Pi  \Lambda ffl\Lambda `fl\Xi \Pi fl \Upsilon ff\Pi \Psi \Phi ffl\Xi \Pi \Phi \Pi \Psi jae\Delta  Comment

* oe\Phi `o/ AEOEO/\Phi ffi\Lambda o/ oe\Phi \Upsilon ff\Pi  AE\Phi \Psi \Lambda ` !fi\Psi \Omega ff`\Xi \Psi OE" \Phi jo/\Lambda \Sigma  \Xi # \Upsilon ff\Pi \Upsilon \Lambda `\Pi j ff^\Lambda ` oe\Lambda \Psi `ff !\Psi ffi\Phi \Pi \Psi \Phi ijupstream discharges were still ad

\Sigma `\Lambda jj\Lambda \Sigma  \Xi # _\Omega \Phi \Xi `ffl\Phi \Pi  *\Xi \Upsilon \Omega \Phi `\Sigma jff\Pi ij jfiflfl\Lambda j\Psi \Lambda \Sigma  \Lambda \Sigma \Xi \Psi j '\Lambda `\Lambda  ffl\Phi \Sigma \Lambda \Delta  Comment:    Su  directs  the  Council  to  page  6-9 

$Management  Practice  WS2  addresses  the impacts of Metro Atlanta discharges upstream of the Council area.  Su also clarified that Section 

\Gamma \Delta % ,*\Lambda \Upsilon fffflffl\Lambda \Pi \Sigma \Phi \Psi \Xi ff\Pi j \Psi ff \Psi \Omega \Lambda  &\Psi \Phi \Psi \Lambda jae \Phi `\Lambda  \Sigma \Lambda j\Xi fl\Pi \Lambda \Sigma  \Psi ff \Xi \Pi \Upsilon ffifi\Sigma \Lambda  ,&\Psi \Phi \Psi \Lambda ae \Phi \Upsilon \Psi \Xi ff\Pi j' \Pi ff\Psi  ,\Phi \Upsilon \Psi \Xi ff\Pi jae (OEindividual utilities or local governments.  Hendrickx of EPD concurred.  
Comment:  Rojas  suggests  removing  reference  to  emerging  contaminants,  and  just  leaving concerns at blank

\Lambda \Psi  ,)ffffiffifi\Psi \Phi \Pi \Psi jae #`ffffl !\Psi ffi\Phi \Pi \Psi \Phi  \Sigma \Xi j\Upsilon \Omega \Phi `fl\Lambda j Comment
* *\Lambda ``OE +\Lambda \Psi \Lambda `j j\Psi \Phi \Psi \Lambda \Sigma  \Psi \Omega \Phi \Psi  \Psi \Omega \Lambda  _fffi\Pi \Upsilon \Xi ffi '\Phi \Pi \Psi j \Psi ff )`ff\Upsilon \Lambda \Lambda \Sigma  '\Xi \Psi \Omega  _\Omega \Phi \Xi `ffl\Phi \Pi  *\Xi \Upsilon \Omega \Phi `\Sigma jff\Pi ij
`\Lambda \Upsilon fffflffl\Lambda \Pi \Sigma \Phi \Psi \Xi ff\Pi ' \Upsilon \Omega \Phi \Pi fl\Xi \Pi fl ffi\Phi \Pi flfi\Phi fl\Lambda  \Psi ff ,ss\Pi \Upsilon fffi`\Phi fl\Lambda  \Phi \Sigma \Sigma \Xi \Psi \Xi ff\Pi \Phi ffi `\Lambda j\Lambda \Phi `\Upsilon \Omega  ff\Pi  \Lambda ffl\Lambda `fl\Xi \Pi fl

\Upsilon ff\Pi \Psi \Phi ffl\Xi \Pi \Phi \Pi \Psi jae  

Section  8  -  updated  to  reflect  changes  to  management  practices  &  some  additional  minor editorial changes. 
 Ashley asked is there were any questions on materials covered so far 
 Q:  Wyzalek asked is additional changes could still be made to the document.   
A:  Ashley indicated that, yes, changes could still be made, but all comments would need to be received quickly.   
 Comment: Rojas addressed previous concerns that the resource assessments were not complete.  
He indicated that based  on discussion with EPD, that they have indicated that  these documents 
\Phi `\Lambda  ,ff\Pi flff\Xi \Pi flae\Delta  *ff,\Phi j \Phi jjfi`\Lambda \Sigma  _fffi\Pi \Upsilon \Xi ffi \Psi \Omega \Phi \Psi  \Psi \Omega \Lambda j\Lambda  \Sigma ff\Upsilon fiffl\Lambda \Pi \Psi j )`ff^\Xi \Sigma \Lambda  flffff\Sigma  \Sigma \Phi \Psi \Phi  #ff` \Pi ff'' \Phi \Pi \Sigma while the results may still change with additional work in the future, they still provide good data 

to base the Council recommendations on at this stage. Comment:  Ashley agreed with Rojas statement, and noted that while all models contain some 
estimated data, that EPD has put a lot of effort went into these tools.    
Q:  McSwain asked how any plan changes from this point forward will be handled?  Will they be part of the public review process? 
A:    Ashley  and  Su  stated  that  JJG/Jacobs  can  accept  comments  through  April  20th.    Ashley 
\Xi \Pi \Sigma \Xi \Upsilon \Phi \Psi \Lambda \Sigma  \Psi \Omega \Phi \Psi  --./-\Phi \Upsilon ff(j 'fffiffi\Sigma  ffl\Phi o/\Lambda  \Psi \Omega \Lambda  \Upsilon \Omega \Phi \Pi fl\Lambda j jfiflfl\Lambda j\Psi \Lambda \Sigma  \Phi \Psi  \Psi ff\Sigma \Phi OEij _fffi\Pi \Upsilon \Xi ffi ffl\Lambda \Lambda \Psi \Xi \Pi fl' (fi\Psi  \Psi \Omega \Phi \Psi 
_fffi\Pi \Upsilon \Xi ffi \Upsilon \Phi \Pi  ,\Upsilon ff\Pi \Sigma \Xi \Psi \Xi ff\Pi \Phi ffiffiOE \Phi ))`ff^\Lambda ae )ffi\Phi \Pi  '\Xi \Psi \Omega  \Upsilon \Omega \Phi \Pi fl\Lambda j \Psi \Omega \Phi \Psi  \Phi `\Lambda  #ff`\Psi \Omega \Upsilon ffffl\Xi \Pi fl\Delta  !j\Omega ffi\Lambda OE j\Psi \Phi \Psi \Lambda \Sigma  \Psi \Omega \Phi \Psi they can send full comments back out to Council or the technical committee prior to submittal to 

EPD.   

Meeting Summary  
Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #10 

 April 26, 2011 

 

7 
 

Q:  Thomas Wicker asked about the 45-day public comment period.  Is Council planning to look at changes again? 
A:    Ashley  stated  that  the  public  comment  period  would  last  from  May  9th  \Gamma   June  23rd.    The projected  schedule  is  to  review  and  respond  to  public  comments  through  July  and  August.  
Council may choose to meet in August, based on the magnitude of comments received.  Ashley indicated  that  final  Council  review  should  occur  by  September  9th.    After  this  date,  EPD  will 
adopt the plan as recommended, advise the Council of changes needed, or adopt with conditions.  Final EPD adoption should occur by September 30th. 
    
Q:  Wicker asked if Council members could still make comments during public review period.   A:    Kevin  Farrell  indicated  that  Council  members  do  not  need  to  use  comment  collection 
website, they can coordinate directly with Jacobs. Comment:  Ashley requested Council feedback on how they would like to handle the approval 
process.   Comment: Rojas recommended that Council conditionally approve the plan for public comment, 
but requests Jacobs to review document against technical committee recommendations to ensure all recommendations have been addressed.   
Comment:    Su  noted  that  the  technical  committee  meeting  summary  would  be  sent  out  to  the entire Council so everyone could see their recommendations. 
 Q:  Ham asked if the Council would meet again after the comments are received. 
A:  Ashley indicated that the decision was up to the Council and the level of comments received.  Su  commented  that  one  Council  plans  to  meet  in  mid-July  and  another  in  mid-September  to 
discuss public comments received.   Comment:  Ham indicated that he would support bringing the entire Council together to review 
comments and edits.  Rojas concurred.  
5.  Public Comment Tool 
\Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Sigma  \Upsilon \Phi \Pi \Theta \Pi \Psi \Omega \Pi ff fi fl\Phi ffi\Pi ffl \Upsilon \Phi \Pi \Theta \Pi \Psi \Omega fi\Omega ffii\Psi  i\Psi  j`'^\Theta  \Psi \Pi * *\Pi fl _i**\Pi \Psi \Omega  _i\Xi \Xi \Pi _\Omega ffii\Psi  _\Pi \Psi \Omega \Pi \Phi , \Delta  i\Psi \Pi  page fact sheet was distributed. 

 Ashley indicated that comments can be received online at: http://www.gaepdcommentcenter.org 
or e-mailed to EPDComments@dnr.state.ga.us   
Ashley noted that all draft regional water plans will be available on the site, and the public will be able to select each plan to review, download the document for review, make comments, and 
view other comments being made.  
Ashley reviewed the process for accessing documents and making comments.  
Hendrickx  indicated  that  the  Councils  can  see  all  public  comments  as  they  are  being  made,  so there will be no surprises at the end of the review process.  He also noted that EPD will provide a 
preliminary comment review to decide if EPD or the Council should respond.  
6.  Executive Summary Review  

Meeting Summary  
Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #10 

 April 26, 2011 

 

8 
 

Ashley  introduced  the  draft  Executive  Summary,  which  was  provided  in  hard  copy  in  the meeting  handouts.    He  indicated  that  although  this  document  is  newly  drafted,  that  it  should 
contain no information that council members have not seen.  
Su  mentioned  that  each  Council  guided  what  their  final  document  would  look  like.    Some Councils provided longer executive summaries.  She encouraged Council members to review the 
summary  to  ensure  that  their  message  is  presented  as  desired.   The  executive  summary will  be included in the public review version after finalization.  Su noted that JJG/Jacobs would provide 
all Council members with a hard copy of the final draft plan with the supplemental documents on CD. 
 7.  Council Discussion: Future Council Role and Recommendations 
Ashley  requested  feedback  from  the  Council  members  on  the  future  of  the  Council.    What  do they  want their  role to  be  going  forward?    Who will  be  the clearing  house  for  information  and 
coordination for regional water planning activities?  Does the Council have recommendations for Regional Commissions to be involved? 
 Comment:  Chairman  Richardson  indicated  that  Council  overlaps  3  Regional  Commissions,  so 
coordinatio\Gamma  \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi  \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Sigma \Pi  \Upsilon \Phi \Psi \Omega ff\Sigma  \Theta \Sigma  fi\Theta flfl\Theta ffi\Omega ffl\Lambda i j\Pi  `ffl\Sigma \Psi  \Gamma \Psi \Lambda \Pi fi \Lambda \Xi `\Lambda  \Lambda \Xi \Pi  fl\Theta \Gamma `ffl fi\Pi ffi\Theta \Sigma \Theta \Psi \Gamma  \Psi \Gamma  \Lambda \Xi \Pi  '\Psi \Omega \Gamma ffi\Theta ffl^\Sigma future will likely be made by EPD. 
 Ashley  noted  that  some  Councils  are  making  recommendations  to  the  state  about  the  reappointment  of  Council  members.    Existing  members  terms  expire  February  2012,  but  some Councils are recommending that the state consider the renewal of Council terms for at least onethird of the existing members to provide continuity.  
Q:  Chairman Richardson asked if appointment decisions would ultimately go back to the State legislature. 
A:    Farrell  indicated  that  likely  they  would,  but  Council  recommendations,  if  captured,  would still be considered. 
Comment: Gator Hodges testified to the benefit of keeping some existing members engaged.   Comment:  Rojas  also  indicated  that  he  would  also  support  some  renewals  for  a  continuity 
factor.  
Q:  Hodges asked if the Councils would stand permanently. A:  Su indicated that some Councils are recommending that.  For example, the Savannah Upper- 
Ogeechee Council plans to form a permanent organization. Comment:    Farrell  indicated  that  the  plan  will  be  updated  at  some  point  down  the  road,  there 
will likely be some Council formed for this process Comment:    Wyzalek  noted  that  the  State  Water  Plan  indicated  that  regional  plans  will  be 
updated every 5 years. Comment:    Ashley  concurred,  but  indicated  that  the  law  does  not  make  any  statements  about 
Council reappointment.   Comment: Charles Harris noted that as a stakeholder, he would like to see continued input and 
involvement from a Council as the region changes.   

Meeting Summary  
Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #10 

 April 26, 2011 

 

9 
 

Q:  McSwain asked if the most appropriate means for making recommendations was to include a 
\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Delta \Lambda \Xi \Lambda \Pi \Delta  \Sigma \Pi  \Delta \Upsilon \Lambda  \Phi \Psi \Theta \Pi  \Omega \Pi  \Delta \Upsilon \Lambda  ff\Omega fi\Pi fl\Sigma \Psi ffi\Gamma  ffl\Lambda \Gamma \Sigma i\Lambda \Gamma j  A:  Ashley indicated it was. 

 Q:  Barry Peters asked if the new administration was backing this process? 
A:  Farrell indicated yes, that there is a lot of talk about water.  He also noted that having these plans in place will be important for the State when talking to other states about our shared water 
issues. Comment:  Tony  Bass  notes  that  Georgia  is  a  blessed  state  with  50+  annual  inches  of  rainfall 
each of year.  He noted that he has not seen this highlighted in the plan. Comment:  Rojas  concurred  and  noted  that  EPD  Director  Barnes  has  previously  indicated  that 
`\Lambda \Omega i'\Sigma \Theta ffi\Gamma  ^\Theta ter issues are more political in nature than physical. Comment:    Bass  requests  that  a  note  about  the  average  quantity  of  rainfall  should  be  added  to 
executive summary.  
8.  Vote to Approve Draft Plan for Submittal to EPD Chairman  Richardson  opened  the  floor  for  discussion  related  to  adoption  of  the  plan  or  any 
associated conditions of approval.  
After  no  discussion  was  initiated,  co-chair  Ben  Copeland  made  a  motion  to  vote  to  adopt  the draft  plan  subject  to  the  inclusion  of  the  technical  committee  items.    Council  members  Larry 
McSwain and Tony Rojas seconded the motion.    
Once the motion was on the floor Chairman Richardson opened the floor to any discussion.  
Q:  Ham asks is there still can be changes to plan after this draft adoption A:    Chairman  Richardson  indicated  that  yes,  this  process  will  be  a  fluid  process  through  the 
public comment period.  
A vote was taken, and the motion carried unanimously among voting members.  (Russell Adams, a Council member ex-officio, was in attendance but abstained from voting). 
 Chairman Richardson thanked the Council for their hard work over the past 2 years. 
 Comment: Rojas thanked Jacobs and EPD staff for their support through this process. 
 Council made a resounding support of thanks for Chairman Richardson. 
 Chairman Richardson opened the floor to any comments from the public or local officials.  No 
comments were received.  
The meeting was adjourned at 11:10 a.m.  
 
Meeting Attendees   

Meeting Summary  
Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #10 

 April 26, 2011 

 

10 
 

Council Members in attendance  Russ Adams 
Tony Bass Jason Briley 
Blair Cleveland Ben Copeland Jr 
Keith Dalton Jim Ham 
Bobby Hamby Charlie Harris 
Gator Hodges William Lazenby  

Paul Leath Larry McSwain 
Hal Newberry Harvey Norris 
Barry Peters Robert Ray 
Elmo Richardson Tony Rojas 
William Whitten Thomas Wicker 

  
Council Members not in attendance  John Bembry 
Jerry Davis Robert Dickey 
Richard Haddock 

Jay Matthews Eva Persons 
Terry Scarborough 
  
Staff in attendance  Kevin Farrell (EPD)  
Ted Hendrickx (EPD) David Ashley (Jacobs JJG)  
Tai-Yi Su (Jacobs JJG)  Charlotte Weber (Jacobs JJG)  
Katherine McLeod Gurd (AECOM)   
 Technical Sub-Committee in attendance  
Marianne Golmitz (City of Warner Robins) Mike Hopkins (Newton County Water and Sewerage Authority)  
Mark Wyzalek (Macon Water Authority)   
 Partnering Agencies and General Public  
Brandon Ashley (GA Farm Bureau) Amberly Ferris (Lamar County Water) 
Mark Fordham *Karol Kelly (UGA-Extension) 
*Patti Lanford (Georgia DNR Wildlife Resources) *Skip Langley (Regional Representative for Senator Isakson) 
Sam Najim *Bill Stembridge (Regional Representative for Senator Chambliss)  
Gene Trammell *Adrianne Wood (Department of Community Affairs) 
 *Indicates attendee represented a partnering agency  Clay.Zielinski 49 55 13 27 3 111 3 116 1 EDT NA Georgia Department of Natural Resources MOC_CM10_Summary.pdf en Microsoftü¾™–„¼ Office Word 2007 