

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

1
Georgia Department of Natural Resources 

Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 

Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 FAX: 404/675-6247  

  
December 20, 2010  
M E M O R A N D U M  
 TO:   Council Members  
     FROM:  David Ashley, JJG/Jacobs 

Tai-Yi Su, JJG/Jacobs Charlotte Weber, JJG/Jacobs  
 SUBJECT:  CM#9 Meeting Summary 
    Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting  
CC:    Kevin Farrell, GA EPD     Ted Hendrickx, GA EPD 
          
Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan Regional Water Planning 
 CM#9 Meeting Summary 
 Meeting Date:  December 13, 2010 
Location:    Go Fish Education Center    Perry,  Georgia 
 1) Welcome and Introduction  
 Chairman Elmo Richardson welcomed the group.   Michael with the Go Fish Education Center 
welcomed everyone and provided a brief summary  of the Go Fish Education Center and its mission to the group. 
 2) Plan Schedule Extension   
Chairman Richardson asked Kevin Farrell to pr ovide an update on the schedule extension for developing the Regional Water Plan.   
  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

2
Farrell summarized the November 24, 2010 memo  by Director Barnes that provides a three-month schedule extension for the development  of Regional Water Plan.  He postpones the 
beginning of the 45-day public comment period from February 7th to May 9th, and the submission of the final draft plan to  EPD no later than September 30 th, 2011.  The additiona l time will allow 
for additional Resource Assessment information to be incorporated into the draft plans.  Farrell mentioned that the Upper Oconee Council plans to use the additional time to meet with the local 
elected officials in the region and brief them on the draft plan.    
Q: Jim Ham asked about plans for local government involvement. A: Farrell responded that there is no set way  to conduct local government outreach.  The Upper 
Oconee Council is planning three different public  meetings to engage the local governments in their region. 
Comment: Ham recommended that the Council have  meetings for clusters of 3-4 counties at a time so that the meetings are closer to atte nd.  The County Commissione rs and City Councils 
should be invited.  A written invitation was recommended so that there is a record. Comment: Elmo agreed that the lack of partic ipation by local governments was a concern.  Butts 
County and the City of Warner Robins have b een consistently attending meetings, but many others have not attended. 
Comment: Adrianne Wood with Department of  Community Affairs (DCA) recommended that involving the Regional Commissions  will help engage the elected o fficials.  Su mentioned that 
an invitation to this meeting  was sent to all city and county  officials based on an updated post-election list that Wood and the Regional Commissions helped put together.  
Comment: Ham stated that the counties and the c ity elected officials need to be invited in addition to the Regional Commi ssions, which only includes some  representation from local 
elected officials. Comment: Chairman Richardson offered to attend local meetings to help with the information 
process.  
Q: Co-Chair Copeland asked if there was an update on EPD's revised groundw ater yield analysis for the Cretaceous Aquifer. 
A: Tai-Yi Su and David Ashley replied that the revised results are anticipated for December 23rd.    
3) Recent Meeting Update  
November 18th Technical Committee Meeting Ashley stated that the Technical Committee met to  discuss the comments on the first draft plan 
received from EPD.  The version distributed  to the Council today re flects revisions to management practices that addressed EPD's a nd the committee's comments.  The details on the 
recommended water management practices are summ arized in Sections 6 through 8 of the draft Regional Water Plan.  The plan for the meeting  is to discuss the refined list of management 
practices one at a time and then answer any que stions.  Ashley thanked the Technical Committee for their hard work. 
 December 7th Instream Ad Hoc Meeting  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

3
The meeting was held at Macon Water Author ity for all of the Regional Water Planning Councils to provide additional information on the current interim instream flow policy and the 
Resource Assessments.   Su provided a summary  of the meeting.  The speakers included EPD's Nap Caldwell who presented the history of instre am flow requirements in Georgia, Gail Cowie 
who provided a summary of instream flow po licies for neighboring states, and Dr. Mary Freeman, who talked in depth about the importance  of variability in str eam flows (high flows, 
low flows, etc.) in providing habitat.  MOC  Council members attended the meeting included Larry McSwain, Eva Persons and Technical  Committee members Mike Hopkins and Mark 
Wyzalek.  Dr. Freeman provided  some options for additional ev aluation for consideration, including: 1) quantify flow re gime alteration (degree of change) by comparing the unimpaired 
flows with projected demand; 2) evaluate highe r minimum flows for Resource Assessments; and 3) place and evaluate additional nodes for specific natural resources to be protected. 
 Q: Ham asked how 7Q10 was calculated and if  changing the instream flow requirements will 
impact any recommendation for future off-line reservoirs on small tributary streams. A: Farrell and Su explained that the 7Q10 is t ypically calculated base d on the nearest stream 
gage that is most representative of the stream in question.   Comment: Chairman Richardson added that rainfall  data and the watershed data are considered 
when extrapolating 7Q10 or estimating reservoir yield.  
Q: John Bembry agreed that peri odic floods are very important to  fisheries.  He asked if the 7Q10 addresses the periods of high water needed for a healthy ecosystem. 
A: Su responded that minimum instream flows do  not address the periodic  need for high flows.  Dr. Freeman suggested that more detailed studies  in the natural variability of the stream would 
provide this information.  The unimpaired flow s in the surface water availability Resource Assessment are conservative simula tions of stream conditions with the human impacts removed 
to the degree possible.  
Q: Eva Persons commented that Florida's standards include both depth and flow . A: Su commented that there was a hand-out from  the meeting that will be provided to the 
Council that summarizes the requirements for ne ighboring states.  Su e xplained that Florida's minimum instream flow and level requirements are established through site-specific studies.  The 
number of minimum instream flows and levels  established by these studies are documented each year.  
 There was a discussion regarding the instream fl ow protections in other states.  Georgia is 
protective in comparison to many of the states, although the requirements are different.  
McSwain commented that all other states seemed to  have better protection than Georgia.  Ashley pointed out that this was not correct because  South Carolina does not have a water withdrawals 
permitting program until very recently.  It rece ntly passed the 2010 South Carolina Surface Water Withdrawal, Permitting, Use and Reporting Ac t to begin regulating withdrawals.  North 
Carolina requires water users to report their us e but does not regulate withdrawals.  Recently the state has begun a program to determine ecologically protective flows, but this will likely be years  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

4
in the making.  Alabama and Tennessee also do not  have instream flow standards for water withdrawals permitting.   Wastewater discharge permits are mostly based on annual 7Q10. 
 Comment: Bembry commented that  flow variability is very important, especially because the 
MOC is downstream of the Metr o Water District.  Periodic fl oods in the Ocmulgee River are important for protecting habitat conditions. 
 There was a discussion about the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) license 
requirements for Lake Jackson, which is a Georgia Power Company-operated Lake.  EPD cannot change the flow releases required under the co mpany's FERC license.  Permits on the tributaries 
to the Ocmulgee River would require 7Q10 mini mum instream flows, but the main stem minimum release is controlled by the FERC license. 
 Q: Ham asked if Macon Water Authority and othe rs have minimum instream flow requirements 
enforced by EPD.   A: Tony Rojas responded that their withdrawal permit includes a 2-stage seasonal minimum flow 
limit on the Ocmulgee River.  However, because  their withdrawal existed prior to 1977 (when surface water withdrawals began to be regulated in  Georgia) they are grandfathered to withdraw 
a 35-MGD quantity at all times.  There is a sepa rate withdrawal permit for the Lucas reservoir with a minimum flow requirement below the reser voir.  Rojas also commented that this permit 
was issued before EPD adopted the 2001 Interim Instream Flow Policy.  
There was a discussion that Lake Jackson is a  FERC regulated dam with a 400 cfs (or inflow if less) minimum flow requirement.  EPD cannot require a higher release from the dam than is 
required in the FERC license.  There have been  waivers in the past  during extreme drought conditions to maintain the levels in Lake Jackson.   
 All of the Federal reservoirs were built before  the state had minimum flow and water withdrawal 
permitting requirements.  Additionally, the re servoir releases are protected by Federal supremacy.   
 Thomas Wicker explained that Georgia Power performs an extensive public participation process 
as part of relicensing.    
Rojas commented that before Lake Lanier, the  flows in the Chattahoochee River were probably pretty small during drought.  Now the flows ar e stored and can be released during extreme 
drought conditions.  There are benefits to dams.  
McSwain asked about the grandfathered permits. Farrell commented that the pre-existing withdrawal quantities are grandfathered if they were 
issued prior to 1977; however, a ny increases in withdrawals ar e subject to instream flow requirements.   
 Su discussed one of the evaluation options su ggested by Dr. Freeman.  She recommended that 
additional nodes might help provide a more refined scale to the study (for the natural resources to  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

5
be protected).  Dr. Freeman recommended pr ioritizing the high-value resources and the functionality that they want to preserve.  This  will require working with WRD to prioritize and 
identify the high value resources.  
Farrell commented that the purpose of the ad  hoc meeting was to provide the Councils with additional information.  The Council's draft plan  currently includes a  recommendation to the 
state to further study instream flow issues.   Farrell asked if there we re any changes to the recommendation for additional studies for instream  flows.  Su added that specific language or 
written suggestions on the recommendation were welcomed.  
Les Ager (member of the public) commented that  permit conditions that allow a stream to be pumped dry are not appropriate.  He suggested  that the Council recommend that the State phase 
out antiquated zero minimum flow requirements for the grandfathered permits.  
December 8th Natural Resources Commission (Joint Committee on Water Supply) Meeting  Elmo asked Ashley to provide a summary of this  meeting in Atlanta.  The Water Stewardship 
Act (SB370), created a legislative committee to develop a report on water issues.  The Commission received status updates from several agencies. 

\Gamma   Georgia Environmental Finance Authority (GEFA) - has legislative authority to address water supply issues. 

o  GEFA has provided over $200 million in f unding for water supply projects since 1985.  Their funding comes from four sources , two state and two federal.  This 

year, because of budget issues, the Ge neral Assembly mandated that GEFA securitize its Georgia Fund, using $288 Million, and leaving a balance of only $28 
million.   
o  In 2008 GEFA was given broad legisla tive authority (SB 342) for funding and developing water supply projects, but has  received neither funding nor staff to 

support any major initiatives. 
o  GEFA has funded $14 million in water cons ervation projects using federal ARRA (stimulus) monies. 

o  GEFA recently initiated a study (Water  Supply Interconnection Redundancy and Reliability Act) of the in terconnection potential of wate r providers in the Metro 

North Georgia Water Planning District  
\Gamma   EPD - Director Allen Barnes discussed the  status of the State Water Plan and the 3-month schedule extension.  He commented th at they continue  to work with the 

governor's office on the reauthorization of Lake Lanier.  EPD also presented a new rule on interbasin transfer on Dec. 7 th   using the identical language from the State Water Plan 
that outlines a 22-step process when consid ering interbasin transfers.  The rule is currently available for public comment and will be considered at the DNR Board meeting 
on January 22nd.  
Comment: Rojas commented that an interbasin tran sfer rule provides much more flexibility than a law would but ensures there is a process. 
Q: Ham asked if the rule established restrictions to the distance of interbasin transfers.    

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

6
A: Ashley responded that there are a number of c onsiderations that would have to be addressed but there are no constraints on distance.   
Q: Bembry asked for clarification that the Director is responsible.   A: Rojas commented that the EPD Director's decisions are subject to higher authorities.   
Q: Bembry asked if there were any requirements regarding existing transfers. A: There was a discussion that  the current interbasin transfer s benefit the Council.  Ashley 
commented that any major changes in existing inte rbasin transfers would likely be subject to the proposed rule. 
 

\Gamma   Georgia Soil and Water C onservation Commission (GSWCC)  - Director Brent Dykes discussed a study that looked at  existing dams with the potential for water supply.  There 

is a list of the top 20 sites, most of which  are located in North Georgia.  Ham commented that there are a couple of GSWCC-managed dams in Monroe and Lamar Counties. 
\Gamma   Georgia Water Policy Center - Doug Wilson pr ovided an instructive discussion showing the issues in southwest Georgia, primarily in the Lower Flint Basin.  Large numbers of 

agricultural withdrawals are re ducing or eliminating dry w eather streamflows in three basins (Flint, Ochlockonee, Suwannee). 
\Gamma   Metro Atlanta Chamber of Commerce - Katie Kirkpatrick gave a presentation advocating for reauthorization of Lake Lanier and additional funding for water supply projects. 
\Gamma   Georgia Conservancy - Will Wingate ga ve a presentation supporting SB 370 and additional water conservation; and acknowledgi ng that new water supply reservoirs may 

be needed.  But he advocated for a stepwise  process for reservoirs, essentially making them a last resort after other options we re shown inadequate; and for expansion of 
existing reservoirs in preference to new reservoirs. 
\Gamma   Georgia Chamber of Commerce - Chris Clark advocated for development of new supplies, urging the committee to remember that water is a key competitive issue and that 

our neighboring states are already saying that Georgia has inadequate water supplies.  
4) Review Revised Draft Plan Sections 1 - 5    
Su provided a brief overview of the major comments received by EPD. -  Coordination with local governments and interested stakeholders 

-  Strengthening the linkages between the Counc il's vision and goals an d not just filling gaps 
-  Working within the page limits -  Groundwater gap analysis (comments from Dr. Kennedy) 
-  Addition of summary box at the beginning of each section  
In addition, updated water demand forecast for energy generation and watershed modeling results and have been added to Section 4 and 5, respectively. 
 Q: There were several questions about the energy demands. 
A: The water withdrawals for energy generation are based on type of process.  The assumption is that plants with similar processes will have si milar water withdrawal/consumption factors (water 
withdrawal or consumption per megawatt of po wer generation).  The energy forecasts include  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

7
the energy currently used as well as future need s.  Future energy needs were developed by the energy ad hoc forecasting group.  Some of the fu ture energy needs were not allocated to a 
specific facility or process.  The forecasts will be  updated in the future when the Public Service Commission has better available data. 
 Q: Bembry asked if additional model runs should  be considered to reflect changes in the energy 
demand. A: Su responded that if the C ouncil feels that some  of the unallocated energy development will 
be located in the Middle Ocmulgee Region, then  additional model runs can be done to reflect their water use.  At the moment this information is not available. 
Q: Bembry asked if the forecasts include the biomass and green energy potential for the region. A: Su responded that biomass is  considered in the mix of the  energy production in the future.  
The future generation is not location-specific and is a pretty small blend of the energy sources for the future. 
 There was some discussion regarding the land use  map (Figure 2-3) in the draft plan.  Some 
suggested overlaying the city  or county boundaries on maps.  Th ere were discussions about posting some of the maps and map files on the we bsite so they were available for the local 
governments to use.  
Q: Bembry asked if all of the cities and counties in the region have a copy of the draft plan. A: Su responded that DCA developed a list of all  of the elected officials  within the region.  The 
elected officials were invited to  this Council meeting and will be invited to future meetings.  There are plans to send letters to inform local  governments on where to access the draft plan.  If 
Council members encourage elected officials to read the draft plan, it is important to inform them that it is still a preliminary draft. 
 Su explained that the groundwater availability s ection was revised  based on specific technical 
comments from Dr. Kennedy.  The section has not  been reviewed yet by Dr. Kennedy but the revisions are based on his comments.   
 Discussion: There were questions about the existing groundwater permits in the Crystalline Rock 
aquifer (in Jasper County particular ly).  There is one well for the Ci ty of Monticello that is quite deep in the Crystalline Rock.   
 Su explained that the Crystalline Rock water ba lance model predicted availability ranges from 
0.01 - 0.063 MGD/sq.mi.  There is a lot of uncertain ty with well yields in the Crystalline Rock aquifer, so the lower end of this range is used for conservative planning.  This is under the 
assumption that the aquifer underlying the Middle  Ocmulgee Region is similar to the modeled area. 
 Q: Rojas commented that Figure  5-1 appears to blend countie s that use surface water and 
groundwater systems.   A: Su responded that the figure c ould be clarified.  The intent wa s to show the geographic extent 
of the Resource Assessments.  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

8
 Q: Wyzalek commented that the energy use (in Fi gure 5-1) is misleading with zero production 
for the Lumber City node which includes Plant Scherer.  He recommended using a symbol instead of the number zero.   
A: Su agreed.  She commented that the table does not reflect the revised forecasts.    
Q: Ham asked about Table 5-1 and whether the well in Jasper County the only one that is shown.   A: Su responded that only the wells with water withdrawal permits are listed, so the summary 
does not include individual wells and public we lls using less than 100,000 gallons/day.  Su responded that the list of permits would be check ed to make sure that no permits were missing 
from the table or associated with the incorrect  aquifer.  Specific communities mentioned by the Council included Crawford County, City of Flovilla, and others. 
 Su returned to Table 5-1 and added that the  revised results for the  Cretaceous Aquifer are 
expected in late December.  The gap is expected to decrease.  
Q: Bembry asked how the agricultural demands in  the lower portion of the region were allocated to the Floridan and Cretaceous aquifer.  He su ggested that the Plan or supplemental materials 
should include information on which permits wit hdraw from each of the aquifers, so that permittees know if they withdraw from an aquifer with a gap (Cretaceous aquifer).  
A: Su stated that the future water forecasts are  based on the location of the current withdrawals.  Dr. Hook's forecasts considered the application rates and the source of the withdrawal. 
Comment: John added that the use of the Floridan aquifer should be encouraged, where possible. Comment: Ben commented that the a quifers don't layer neatly.  The  Floridan is actually on top 
of the Cretaceous aquifer in the region. Comment: Su added that the productivity of the aquife rs is different and can be site specific.  Dr. 
Kennedy commented that the upper tip of the Floridan aquifer the region has access to may not be as productive as the rest of the Floridan aquifer. 
 *During the break, Wood recommended that a cross- section figure of the aquifers be added to 
the report to help readers understand the aquifer layering within the region.*  
Su continued with the overview of the changes.  Table 5-2 was updated on a county basis and shows a trend of where future  water supplies may be needed.   Section 5-3 shows the surface 
water quality results with the watershed and lake model results.    
Q: Rojas asked how EPD calculated the split in  nutrient forecasts between point source and non-point source loads.  The summary implies that wa stewater treatment plants  are the source of the 
runoff, but lawn fertilizers typically play a sign ificant role.  He is concerned about how these figures may appear to the public. 
Su responded that the watershed models do indicate  that the wastewater di scharges in the Metro Water District are the main cont ributors of nutrient  loadings in the Upper Ocmulgee watershed.  
The group discussed that the assumptions in the  watershed model are conservative and modeled the future discharges at full permit values. 
  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

9
Rojas commented that if the wastewater discharges are taken to permit limits, then the runoff associated with future land use should be used, or the percentages are not accurate. 
Su responded that the wastewater modeling assumptions are very conservative and agreed it is unusual for plants to operate at their permit limits. 
Rojas is concerned that the results target wastew ater treatment facilities.   The group discussed that the nonpoint source runoff s hould mirror the same growth reflected in the full wastewater 
permit limits.  There was some discussion about looking at the watershed model results under existing discharge levels versus under full permit limits.  Ben commented that with the interbasin 
transfer, a higher portion of the Metro Water Distri ct's point source discha rges were draining to the watershed than the nonpoint sources, which would drain to the Chattahoochee basin. 
  
The group discussed that it would be helpful to  have watershed models for the entire MOC and not just the area upstream of Lake Jackson.  Su  will look at the watershed model results again 
and discuss the Councils concerns with the mo delers.  There will be a Technical Memorandum on the Lake Jackson watershed model at some point in the near future. 
 5) Review Sections 6 through 8 
 Ashley commented that there was going to be a cu rsory review of Sections 6 - 8 and then after 
lunch there would be an opportun ity to discuss any of the speci fic management practices in greater detail. 
 EPD asked that more evidence of coordination  with local governments and state agencies be 
included in the draft plan.  At  the beginning of the planning pr ocess, there was a significant outreach process to the water util ities and local governments.  Th ere may be increased interest 
from the local governments now that there is a draft plan with draft recommendations.  
The groundwater gap is expected to decrease an d the recommendations ma y be revised based on these results.   
 Previously, the Council recommende d removing some of the specificity related to management 
practices because of con cerns about the different needs of di fferent systems, permit compliance, and costs of implementation.  EPD requested additional specificity in the review comments for 
the first draft.  In the current draft, the mana gement practices outlined in Section 6 - 8 try to strike a balance between adding  details without making a "one si ze fits all" requirement.  The 
management practices are separated into two gr oups; the priority practi ces and the additional practices that may be considered on a local basis,  based on site specific  conditions.  The priority 
management practices are shown  in Table 6-1 and the additional  management practices in Table 6-2.   
 Q: Bembry asked about the benc hmarking goal for residential pe r capita water use.  Given the 
requirements in the Water Stewardship Act, he  suggested that the benchmark be changed to reduce residential per capita use instead of to maintain and/or reduce residential per capita use. 
A: Deatre Denion noted that la ck of detailed billing data  categories may complicate the  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

10
calculation of the residential per capita use. A: Ashley commented that the flexibility was provided for smaller communities and 
communities who already have aggressive programs. PC will look at re-wording "maintenance".   
Comment: Bob Lazenby mentioned that the fore stry commission has a manual of best management practices for forestry that shou ld be included along with the nonpoint source 
practices included in Table 6-1.  
Comment: Ham asked for the text on page 6- 10 under WQ6 - Reduce Runoff from Impervious Surfaces to be changed to read  "Local and State Governments  may consider..." adding the state 
to the existing language.  
There was a question regarding wh ether state development project s were required to use the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual.  Farre ll responded that the state follows the local 
requirements.  There was a di scussion that GDOT is an exception and follows adopted procedures and not local requirements. 
 Chariman Richardson commented that the Federal  and State Governments have tried to exempt 
themselves from the storm water utility fees in the past.  Rojas added that there is a recent release from the Federal Justice Department; cases ha ve been decided differently depending on the 
connection between the service and the storm water utility fee.    
Q: Persons asked for the paperwork for the $10 0,000 319 grants that were mentioned at the ad hoc meeting. 
A: Every Council is eligible for up to $100,000 in  grant funds that can  be awarded to a local government, and that government must have a local match of 40 per cent of the total.   The match 
can be in-kind services.  Councils have until the end of January to select their priority project.  
Q: Ham asked what Council has the biggest gap. A: Lower Flint, with a large gap at the Bainbridge node. 
 Q: Wood asked if the Middle Ocmulgee was coor dinating questions rega rding kaolin water 
usage with the Upper Oconee Council, as they have a higher kaolin production. A: Yes. 
 Q: Bembry commented that ther e is a disconnect between the su rface water assessments and the 
groundwater assessments in terms of geography.  So me of the counties share water with those in the Cretaceous and Floridan aqui fers.  He asked if there was  a recommendation to the state to 
realign the Council boundaries based on groundwater. A: Chairman Richardson responded that even  counties who rely on  groundwater for supply, 
discharge wastewater to surface water and therefor e they need to consider both.  The state put a great deal of thought into the Council boundaries. 
A: Farrell added that the aquifer models are on a regional basis with other communities. A: Su commented that the Resource Assessments  and gap analysis looked at what the demands 
are on the groundwater aquifer based on the existing blend of sources.    

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

11
A: Ashley added that the draft plan included a  recommendation to gather additional information on conditions in the Cretaceous aquifer to address the concern that not enough was known. 
 Q: Wood suggested that for management practic e WQ7- Develop Programs to Protect Sensitive 
Land - the term "acquired" should be replaced  with the word "protected" or "placed in conservation land" so that the benchmark is not limited just to land that is purchased in fee 
simple. A: Good comment. 
 Q: Chairman Richardson asked if there was a  discussion at the Legislative Committee meeting 
regarding the Council role following the adoption of the Plan. A: There was discussion at the meeting regarding the need for long-term funding for the 
Councils.  
Ashley read the paragraph in S ection 8.3 that described Plan am endment process to the Council and asked the Council if they w ould like to suggest any changes  or make the language stronger.  
The Council discussed the need  for a process to hold future m eetings to review and discuss amendments to the Plan, as needed.  As the Counc ils are currently not paid for their time, most 
would continue to volunteer to attend a meeting  to discuss potential re visions.  The suggestion was to add language that would  allow the Chair to call a meeti ng (if needed) both before and 
after the end of the MOU in 2012.   Many felt that it was important  for the Councils' work to be funded long-term. 
 There was consensus from the Council to includ e language allowing the Chair to call a meeting 
of the Council between planning pr ocesses to review and discuss any issues that are relevant to the Council, including Plan Revisions. 
 Ashley provided an overview of the significant events currently identified in the draft plan that 
could trigger a re-evaluation of the plan.  
Ham recommended including agriculture into th e first bullet point (i n addition to energy generation or military facilities).  It was requested  that the Plan also list changes related to the 
Judge Magnuson's ruling and other pot ential major political or judi cial decision as events that might trigger an update. 
 6) WaterFirst Program and DCA Roles for Implementation  
 Denion gave an overview of the DCA WaterFirst  program.  The WaterFir st program is both an 
incentive and recognition program for commun ities with strong and comprehensive water programs.  She provided an overview of the app lication process and highlighted some of the 
programs that have helped communities earn  this recognition.  Communities that are not designated as WaterFirst but have strong potential , may be admitted into a WaterFirst "class".  
The "class" participants receiv e assistance towards becoming desi gnated.  Benefits associated with the WaterFirst program include networking,  peer-to-peer learning, a 1% interest rate 
reduction on GEFA loans, annual eligibility fo r DCA's Community Development Block Grant  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

12
funds, priority for 319 grant funds, road signa ge, and publicity.  The  designation is renewed every 5 years with an MOA.  She showed  a list of existing designated communities and 
communities currently enrolled in the "class".   There has been low participation from the MOC and Denion encouraged more participation.  Only Lamar County had applied in the past. 
 7) Suggestions for Schedule Extension 
Ashley provided suggestions for use of the additional time from the schedule extension and asked the Council for comments and additional suggestions. 
  -  Conduct additional public outreach to local governments 

-  Coordinate with the Metro Water District -  Refine the recommendations to the State on instream flow study 
-  Refine recommendations on future Council role (beyond February 2012) -  Recommend a project for the available 319 grant set-aside for the region 
 Farrell stated that the Council needs to endorse  a specific project.  Si nce there are several 
potential ideas (Eva Persons mentioned a potentia l idea for Monroe County), they should submit a description of each project(s) for the Coun cil's consideration and then the Council can 
evaluate.  He clarified that it would be  a $167,000 project with  $100,000 federal grant and $67,000 local fund match.  The usual deadline for 319 grant applications is November 30 th, but 
the Regional Water Planning Project has been given additional time and can be submitted no later than January 31, 2011. 
 8) Local Elected Official and Public Comments 
No comments.  
9) Wrap Up/ Next Meeting Upcoming Schedule: 
-  Written comments on draft plan due to PC by January 14th  -  Council will review Final Draft at CM10 (early February 2011) - council members asked to 

avoid the last week of January -  Council to submit an Initial Recommended Plan March 2011 
-  45 day comment period to start May 9th, 2011 -  Final plan to Council - Sept 9th, 2011 
-  Final Recommended Regional Water Plan due no later than Sept 30th, 2011  
 Elmo thanked everyone for their persistence,  dedication, commitment, and continued attendance 
at the meeting.  Other Councils have struggled with  attendance, but the great  participation of our Council will lead to a really strong plan.  Elmo urged the Council members to submit comments. 
 Ham thanked Ashley and Su for getting the prelim inary draft plan to the Council in advance of 
the holidays.  
The Go Fish Center staff offered a tour of the facility.  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

13
 The meeting was adjourned at 2pm. 
 Meeting Attendees 

Council Members in attendance 
John Bembry 
Jason Briley 
Ben Copeland Jr. 
Keith Dalton  
Robert Dickey 
Jim Ham  
William Lazenby  
Larry McSwain 

Harvey Norris  
Eva Persons  
Barry Peters 
Elmo Richardson 
Tony Rojas  
William Whitten 
Thomas Wicker

 
Council Members not in attendance 
Russ Adams 
Tony Bass 
Blair Cleveland 
Jerry Davis  
Richard Haddock 
Bobby Hamby 
Charlie Harris 

Gator Hodges 
Paul Leath 
Jay Matthews  
Hal Newberry 
Robert Ray 
Terry Scarborough 

Staff in attendance 
Kevin Farrell (EPD) 
David Ashley (Jacobs JJG) 
Tai-Yi Su (Jacobs JJG) 
Charlotte Weber (Jacobs JJG) 
Kimberly Shorter (AECOM) 
 
Technical Sub-Committee in attendance 
Mark Wyzalek (Macon Water Authority) 
Mike Hopkins (Newton County Water and Sewerage Authority) 
Marcie Seleb (Butts County Water and Sewerage Authority) 
 
 Partnering Agencies and General Public 
*Adriane Wood (Department of Community Affairs - DCA) 
*Jimmy Evans (Georgia DNR Wildlife Resources) 
Cliff Bowden (Georgia Farm Bureau) 
Don McGough (Georgia Farm Bureau) 
*Deatre Denion (Georgia Department of Community Affairs)  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #9 
December 20, 2010 

14
*Frank Green (Georgia Forestry Commission) 
*Bill Stembridge (Regional Representative for Senator Saxby Chambliss) 
*Karol Kelly (UGA - Extension) 
Leo Gilmour (City of Perry) 
Tres Thomas (City of Covington) 
Les Ager 
Jarrell Greene 
Chris Petersen 
*Indicates attendee represented a partnering agency
  Clay.Zielinski 32 8 9 3 0 111 1 2 0  -18000 Georgia Department of Natural Resources MOC_CM9_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 8.1 for Word 