

Georgia Department of Natural Resources 

Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 

Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 FAX: 404/675-6247  

  
June 29, 2010 

 D R A F T  M E M O R A N D U M 

 TO:  

SUO Council Members  
     FROM:

  Jeff Larson, GA EPD 

Bill Martello, JJG 
 SUBJECT:

  Council Meeting #6 Summary 
    Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council    

      

Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan Regional Water Planning 
 Council Meeting 6 Summary 
 
Meeting Date:  June 22, 2010 Location: 

  The Gatherings, Louisville, Georgia Attendees:
   See list  

1) Welcome and Council Member Introduction  
Ron Cross, Council Chairman, welcomed ever yone to the meeting and thanked them for 
attending. Council members, EPD staff, planning consultants, partnering agencies, and other 
attendees introduced themselves.    

Council Member Tom Jordan showed video about Louisville and a previously operated industrial site with significant water and wastewater capacity.  This site is currently being marketed for 
new industrial development.  
Jennifer Barrington, the South Carolina liaison representing the Savannah River Basin Advisory 
Council, said their House and Senate approved the bill establishing a water withdrawal 
permitting program.  It was also noted that this bill was currently being reviewed by the 
Governor.  

Chairman Cross discussed the following:  

\Gamma   Planning Council chairs meeting with the EPD Director 
\Gamma   EPD Director's guidelines for management practices 
\Gamma   Governor signing SB370 Water Stewardship Act  
\Gamma   Remarks from the recent gubernatorial candidate's Atlanta forum and their thoughts on 

interbasin transfers.  
\Gamma   There will be another candidate's forum (in either Columbia or Hall County).  
\Gamma   Candidate Eric Johnson seems to be in favor of allowing interbasin transfers.  

Chairman Cross recommended that the Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Council may want to 
look into legal representation to discourage interbasin transfers to make sure that the water in 
the Savannah River is only used for those communities surrounding the Savannah River.  

He believes that the Savannah River will sustain enough yield to provide water for the Counties 
within the basin; however, to make sure this resource will continue to meet future basin needs, 
the Council needs to discourage the use of interbasin transfers.  

PC Bill Martello discussed the meeting agenda and objectives.  
2) Committee Review & Updates  
Chairman Cross introduced the three sub-committees - Technical, Plan Review, and Interstate 
Coordination.  He invited anyone to volunteer for subcommittees that they would be interested 
in participating in.   

Bill Martello reviewed the status for each committee. 
Scott MacGregor is in the process of developing the Interstate Coordination committee and will 
serve as the Chair. The Savannah River Basin Advisory Council has held two regional water 
meetings since January and an upcoming meeting is preliminarily planned for September. It was 
suggested that Scott MacGregor attend these meetings and represent the SUO Council. 

The Technical Committee will be chaired by Tom Wiedmeier.  The initial meeting was held June 
15 where they discussed the Savannah TMDL, reviewed preliminary resource assessments and 
the water availability model along with an initial management practices review perhaps looking 
into urban v. rural practice implementation. 

Plan Review Committee will be chaired by Bruce Azevedo.  The committee is reviewing the 
Technical Memorandum (which will comprise Sections 2-4 of the Draft Plan).  He commented 
that the 2005 baseline figures didn't show a step up to the 2009 projections. Also, the 
description of the area employment status did not fully reflect current positive trends.  Bill 
Martello discussed the upcoming review tasks for the committee in July. 

3) Forecasts Update  
Bill Martello reviewed the revised county demand forecasts for municipal, industrial, agricultural, 
thermoelectric.  He discussed the South Carolina water demands and the methodology for 
developing estimates for their future needs.    

Question (Pat Goran):  Why does his county not show any industrial demand but they have 
industrial water permits in the county.  

Answer:  Bill responded that not all industries were considered in the industrial demand 
category, only certain SIC codes where included in the industrial demand projections.  However, 
he stated that he would confirm the industrial demand data for Hart County.  

Question (Tom Jordan):  He noted that the lower part of his county uses wells for irrigation. 
Answer:  Bill responded that the presentation numbers shown only include surface water use.  
Question:  Why is the municipal water demand shown on the handout for Georgia different than 
what is shown in the slide where we show the Georgia/South Carolina municipal demand? 

Answer:  Bill noted that the handout showed total demand (both surface and ground water) 
while the Georgia/South Carolina comparison was only showing surface water (to compare with 
the SC surface water withdrawals).  Bill stated that we have been sharing the methodology for 
the Georgia/South Carolina projections with South Carolina, and the numbers we showed in the 
presentation are only to be considered as preliminary numbers right now, used for general 
planning purposes in council discussions, and will be refined based on South Carolina input and 
further discussion with South Carolina.  

Question (Larry Walker): Don't we need to be looking at future wastewater return flows as well 
as water demands? 

Answer:  PC explained how the returns will be used and would be accounted for in both the 
water availability as well the water quality models.   

Question (Pat Goran):  Could PC send out the slide tables from presentation for the 
Georgia/South Carolina water demand? 

Answer:  PC stated they would be part of the meeting summary.  
Attendee Wade Johnson showed a letter to the editor of the Augusta Chronicle strongly 
criticizing any transfer of water from the Savannah River to Atlanta.  

4) Guest Speaker from DNR / WRD - Fisheries  
Bill Martello introduced our guest speaker, Ed Bettross, from DNR Fisheries.  A copy of his 
presentation, Protecting "Environmental Flows" in the Georgia's State Water Plan will be 
included with the meeting summary. 

Ed stated that there is a need to mimic pre-dam/reservoir flows to increase the aquatic 
biodiversity.  Minimum 7Q10 flows do not provide enough pulsing within streams to achieve this.  
There are many studies that support these needs.    While fish were emphasized, these flows 
also affect bird migration and seed stock dispersal. 

He discussed the need to maintain cool water springs for juvenile striped bass and the Augusta 
Shoals Instream Flow Study.  

Ed ended his presentation with two suggestions for council consideration: 1) the need to have 
clear management objectives, and 2) understanding of how flow alteration affects those 
objectives.  

Ed also offered the following management practices to protect environmental flows: 

T,  Maximize water conservation (leave more water in the stream) 
T,  Return water to the river as near as possible to the withdrawal 
T,  Utilize water withdrawals before impoundments to maintain upstream-downstream 

connectivity  
T,  Identify free-flowing streams in your region where environmental flows are a high priority 

for protection 
T,  Minimize flow impacts from new reservoirs by: 

o  Increasing the size of existing reservoirs when feasible 
o  Locating new reservoirs on streams with existing reservoirs 
T,  Engage the Technical Advisory Committee 
 Question (Charlie Newton):  Are lower flows in the summer and fall good for the aquatic life?  

Answer:  Ed responded that the fish and aquatic life have adapted to lower flows during these 
periods.  High flows during late winter/early spring are important because fish need these higher 
flows. 

Question (Wade Johnson):  Do the fish on the Savannah River affect the fish along the east 
coast? Could current human development completely kill off any species? 

Answer:  Ed responded that some species have already become extinct and that we are aware 
of others that have significantly decreased in numbers due to decreased habitats.  He also 
noted that a balance between water needs for wild life and humans should to be reached to 
preserve our water needs for the future.  

Question: How well do fish species adapt to dams?  
Answer:  Ed responded that the habitat lost through the installation of dams has significantly 
decreased fish biodiversity numbers. Rivers are habitats for many species and reservoirs have 
created differing habitat to which not all species are able to adapt.  Balance needs to be made 
concerning the few riverine habitats left along the Savannah River.  

Question (Robert Jenkins):  Shouldn't economic interests be kept in mind? 
Answer:  Ed responded that other issues are affected by changing water habitats. These 
changes cause changes to water and its quality.  

Question: Would placing reservoirs on tributaries be a better option than reservoirs on the 
Savannah River?  

Answer: Ed stated that the addition of any reservoir would have a review process for its 
permitting before it would be constructed.   We have altered flow in order to make it more  

regular. This helps with flood control and engineering has allowed "regular" water flow but this 
has resulted in altered habitats. The example of Augusta flooding regularly which caused loss of 
life and property damage - the reservoirs now keep this from happening as often.  

Question:  Should we be looking at other remediation plans beyond having the USACE pulse 
their releases?  

Answer:  The SUO council may decide that is something they could consider; however Ed 
doesn't currently have specific recommendations.   He stated that the overall idea is that 
naturally occurring flows are important and that includes high, medium, and low flows to make 
sure fish/aquatic life survive.  

Question:  Should low flow conditions be the same because of climate change?  
Answer: Ed stated that the reservoirs actually perpetuate the low flow situation because there is 
no policy requiring flows to be kept higher than the low flow conditions (7Q10).  

Question:  How do reservoirs on the tributaries affect the main water way?  
Answer:  Ed stated that reservoirs can perpetuate low flows during drought periods especially if 
low flow regulations aren't required.  

Chairman Cross commented that balancing environmental needs and human needs is 
important. Both sides need to be addressed, and conservation is a key.  He also noted that the 
council needs to think about how water resources are maintained.  If we are unable to sustain 
fish life, how does that bode to the quality of the drinking water we need to survive? 

Bill Martello commented about how we need to look at how reservoirs are operated and that we 
should try to implement pulsing to simulate natural environments.   

5) Water Quantity Resource Assessment  
Bill Martello introduced Surface Water Quantity.  After discussing the planning nodes along the 
Ogeechee River, Bill discussed that preliminary analysis identifies a small gap in the Ogeechee 
River. 

Question:  When does the gap occur?  
Answer:  PC stated that the gap exists today, but the gap stays fairly constant into the future 
because of increased returns in future.  

Irrigation is a concern for the Ogeechee. More farmers are increasing their surface water use.  
Bill responded that, as a council, we may want to look at how we manage agriculture use and 
consider groundwater sources.  

Council Member Azevedo asked how temperature change will affect water availability. Will this 
water availability cause differences in population migration? There were more comments on 
climate change and how the change in evaporation may affect the `gap'.  

PC then discussed the planning nodes in Savannah River Basin.  With the current USACE 
operations, modeling showed that all demands would be met for both Georgia and South 
Carolina; however, the next steps are to continue to refine South Carolina's data. 

Question:  If Atlanta starts to take water from Savannah River, how would that impact flows?   
Answer:  Bill stated that current use is equivalent to approximately four percent of minimum 
releases from Thurmond.  No modeling has been done to estimate the effects of Atlanta water 
use.  

Question (Pat Goran):  Is anyone looking at what the low flows really need to be? How were 
the low flows determined and have we confirmed that they are what is in place?  

Answer:  PC responded the USACE was willing to consider studies targeted at what flows are 
actually needed.  

Chairman Cross stated that water quality is the main concern of USACE (especially DO for the 
Savannah River). Downstream water quality will be the biggest concern for minimum flow.   

It was discussed that better downstream flow data is needed to determine the actually water 
quality and flow at locations along the river.  Downstream of Lake Thurmond, the river is very 
sensitive and many relationships need to be evaluated.  

The comment was made that politically it seems contradictory to say we support lower minimum 
releases from Thurmond but not allow Atlanta to take water because of impacts to water 
available for downstream use.  

Chairman Cross says he believes the river in the vicinity of Augusta during low flow periods 
looks and feels different and the "environment" of the river changes.  

Someone commented that the USACE is looking at flows and a drought plan that works with 
both states. They are doing studies to look at the flows.  They are modeling to simulate various 
periods of time. However, there is not enough money to do all of this work, and it will take a long 
time (without more funding). 

"Adaptive Management" was brought up.  However, dialog is the key to working with the 
USACE and South Carolina.  It was noted that it is unlikely that there will be a change in 
minimum flow amount.  

Council Member MacGregor mentioned that 3,600 cfs was a recent change in flow; so he 
doesn't think that new modeling efforts will change the minimum flow amount because recent 
studies have been done to set it at 3,600 cfs.  Jeff Larson agreed that the minimum flows from 
the dam probably would not change all that much, but that the USACE has the capability, if 
funding is available, to evaluate various simulations.  

Question: How much flow do we need to keep gravel bar habitats at their full potential?  
Answer:  Ed responds 8,000 cfs.   

Question (Tom Jordan):  How does Lake Thurmond operate during drought periods - Do they 
still use pumped storage?  

Answer/Discussion.  The point was made that water released is not done primarily for power.  
Flood control and water supply are other reasons that water is released from reservoirs.  Power 
generation is a secondary concern. 

If all the water demands are being met, then asking the USACE to change operating release 
flows would be for economic reasons, which the USACE does not consider a priority.  

While we have the water demands met, we still need to think about recreational use and when 
the pool is low how it affects the region's economy.   

Council Member Workman stated that the drought affects their community drastically.  The 
community does not thrive when lake levels are low.  Since the USACE will not help keep lake 
levels higher for economic or recreational reasons, the council needs to plan for and conserve 
to keep lake levels higher.  

Discussions proceeded regarding reservoir effects on downstream flows and that the same 
principles apply for inter-basin transfers.  This led into talks about Savannah water regulations 
and storage. EPD explained that the river needs to keep the same amount of minimum flow in 
the river just the same as inline storage.  

Harold Reheis explained how new reservoirs are permitted by EPD.  
Bill Martello went on to review the groundwater modeling results for the region. 
Question:  Is it okay to supplement surface water withdrawals with ground water withdrawals?  
Answer: Jeff Larson stated that EPD does not object to that as a potential proposed 
management practice 

6) Savannah TMDL/Water Quality Resource Assessment  
Bill Martello led the council with basic Water Quality terminology.  He then recapped the current 
conditions assessment and the initial evaluations of future assimilative capacity in the rivers. 

The Savannah TMDL shows significant reduction will be necessary to permit holders.  There are 
many tributaries showing available assimilative capacity.  While further analysis is ongoing, 
there are some permit holders who show assimilative capacity problems. 

7) Management Practice Options  
Bill Martello identified management practice options grouped by objectives.  He led the council 
in identifying "no-regrets practices", as well as discussing potential rural v. urban area practices 
and groundwater practices that may only pertain to the coastal plain area and not the piedmont.  
Chairman Cross assigned preliminary review of these practices to the Technical Committee. 

Question:  Do irrigation meters actually decrease water use? (It was noted that irrigation meters 
do not get charged for sewer which makes the irrigation water less expensive.)   

Answer:  Bill suggested that the irrigation rates could be separately developed based on 
infrastructure availability and it would be reasonable to charge more for irrigation water use.  

Question:  Is there technology coming within the next 40-50 years that will revolutionize 
wastewater treatment?  

Answer: Bill responded that while we'll still be interested in organics and similar contaminants 
that affect dissolved oxygen, we may see more interest in toxics and pharmaceuticals.  

Question: Within the next 40-50 years do you think the trend of using more grey water for nonpotable use?  

Answer:  Yes, this may evolve as water becomes less available.  
Question:  Jeff Larson asked how the council will coordinate with cities and utilities regarding 
management practices with respect to those entities that would be responsible for implementing 
and funding those practices.  

Answer:  It was suggested that a strategy plan for implementation be made.  
Council Member Newton commented that, unless utilities do not meet TMDL requirements for 
discharge, he didn't think there would be many "capital" costs associated with the management 
practices.  EPD could mandate that a community make improvements to increase water quality.  

Question: Is there a chance management practices will become regulations or laws?  Because 
the point when they do, they could add increased capital costs, such as moving people over to 
centralized wastewater from septic tanks.  

Council Member Azevedo identified that there are small private lakes /reservoirs that are not up 
to code (according to the EPD).  He wondered if utilities could take these over for water use. 
Also, comments were made about funding for taking over these reservoirs and making 
upgrades.   

Question:  There are concerns about which management practices will be chosen and writing 
them into a draft plan.  

Answer:  Bill thinks the council members would be accountable for the group they represent.  
For example, if a council member represents a county or a particular stakeholder group, then 
they would transfer information to the utilities in that county or to other similar stakeholders in 
the region. 

Question:  How do we deal with Savannah River and Harbor TMDL issues?   
Answer:  The necessary management practices will be included in the plan but this issue is 
being handled separately with the Savannah River TMDL for the Savannah Harbor.  

There is a draft TMDL affecting the point source dischargers.  A process is being developed for 
the dischargers to determine how the Savannah TMDL will be allocated.  All this will be done 
separate from the SUO Council; however, some council members may be involved with this.    

8) WDCP Regional Plan  
Bill Martello led the group in reviewing the latest TOC for the Draft Plan along with the proposed 
structure and its completion schedule. 

9) Elected Official and Public Comments  
Chairman Cross went around the room for final comments from attendees: 

He asked Jennifer Barrington (SC liaison) if South Carolina is having similar coordination 
meetings.  Jennifer responded that the first regional meetings have occurred in South Carolina 
and they have not discussed water resource issues at this level of detail.  

Chairman Cross commented that he believes that South Carolina should adopt the permitting 
legislation currently being reviewed by the governor's office.  This will allow everyone to 
understand what is being withdrawn and discharged into the river.  

Frank Carl noted that he believes the metro district politicians will vote against inter-basin 
transfers.  

The Thursday night Governor's Debate on the Savannah River was mentioned. 
Alan Saxon mentioned that Tom Wiedmeier (who was not able to attend this meeting) is 
interested in getting into the technical committee and working towards goals.  

The Nature Conservancy talked about how they have been working towards completing land 
acquisition along the Savannah River.  The Conservancy has also worked with the USACE as 
part of the Sustainable Rivers Project along the Savannah River.  

Wade Johnson mentioned that when the lake water level is high, it significantly increases the 
local economy.  Lake use and recreation are major issues for his county (Lincoln) because the 
county has put a large amount of capital into land development around the lake.  

10) Meeting Wrap-up  
Chairman Cross thanked the council members for attending the meeting. 

Chairman Cross stated that no date/locations has been decided for next meeting; however, 
Council Member Walker is working on inviting the Georgia Forestry Commission to present on 
their best management practices at the next meeting.  He also again suggested talking to the 
committee chairs if you are interested in joining one of the committees.  

Meeting was adjourned by 3:00 p.m. 
11) Action Items 

\Gamma   PC to finalize meeting location for Council Meeting 7 
\Gamma   Council Member Newton would like a list of acronyms for the TMDL document. 
  

 CM#6 Meeting Attendees 
 
Council Members in attendance 
Ron Cross, Chair 
Bruce Azevedo 
Braye Boardman 
Jerry Boling 
Don Dye 
Dan Fowler (Alternate) 
Pat Goran (Alternate) 
Robert Jenkins 
Tom Jordan 
Scott MacGregor 
Eddie Madden 
Tim McGill 
Charlie Newton, Vice Chair 
Lewis Sanders 
Stan Sheppard 
Larry Walker 
Tenia Workman 
Alan Saxon (for Tom Wiedmeier) 
 
Council Members not in attendance Charles Cawthon 

Deke Copenhaver 
Barry Cronic 
Mike Eskew 
Patricia Goodwin (Alternate) 
Larry Guest 
Toye Hill 
Ralph Hudgens (Ex-Officio) 
Chris McCorkle 
James H. Newsome 
Lee Webster 
Tom Wiedmeier 
Tom McCall (Ex-Officio) 
 
Staff in attendance Jeff Larson - EPD 

Brian Baker - EPD 
Bill Martello - Jacobs 
Diana Jackson - Jacobs  
Rita Kelly - Jacobs 
 

Partnering Agencies in attendance  John Colberg 
Ed Bettross 
Loren Moore 
Teresa Concannon 
Dennis Black 
Phil Sanders 
Jennifer Barrington 
Mary Gazaway 
William Hargrove 
Nancy Bobbitt 
Jim Hussey 
H. Wade Lincoln 
 
General Public in attendance 
Harold Reheis 
Doug Cheek 
Frank Carl 
Christi Lambert   Rita.Kelly 44 17 9 7 6 110 3 187 1  -14400  SUO_CM6_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 8.1 for Word 