

Georgia Department of Natural Resources 

Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 

Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 FAX: 404/675-6247  
  

December 23, 2010 
 D R A F T  M E M O R A N D U M 

 TO:  

SUO Council Members  
     FROM:

  Jeff Larson, GA EPD 

Bill Martello, Jacobs 
 SUBJECT:

  Council Meeting #8 Summary 
  Savannah-Upper  Ogeechee Water Planning Council (Council)    

      

Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan Regional Water Planning 
 Council Meeting 8 Summary 
 Meeting Date:               

December 14, 2010 Location: 
  The Thomson Depot, Thomson, Georgia Attendees:
    See attached list  

1) Welcome and Introduction, General Topics  
Ron Cross, Council Chairman, welcomed everyone  to the meeting and thanked them for attending. 
Council members, EPD staff, planning contractor  (PC), partnering agencies, and other attendees 
introduced themselves.    

Chairman Cross discussed that the EPD Director had allowed a 90-day ex tension to all planning councils.  
It was suggested that the councils use this time for a dditional public outreach efforts.   In particular, 
outreach to newly elected mayors and county commissioners. 

Chairman Cross asked about the regulatory aspects of  the Regional Water Plan (Plan).  Mr. Bill Martello 
(Planning Contractor for the SUO Council) responded  that the draft Plan included an implementation 
schedule and benchmarks for priority management  practices, which included updates to local water and 
wastewater master plans, and that these could be  used in permitting.  Mr. Jeff Larson (EPD) responded 
that the Plan would be used as a guide for permitting.   Mr. Martello suggested that EPD consider setting 
future performance goals and let lo cal water resources plans outline th eir approach to implementing the 
management practices for meeting these goals.  Th e Council discussed how the Plan may affect water  

utility permitting and questioned how EPD would use  the management practices in the Plan in a 
regulatory context. The Plan was discussed as a do cument to help guide local water and wastewater 
master planning.  

Chairman Cross discussed the new Water Stewardshi p Act and that in his community the outdoor 
watering schedules contained in the Act would not a llow them to continue with their previously 
successful odd/even outdoor watering ordinance.   He believes that his community had finally found 
something that all the residences were following a nd the change in legislation would likely have a 
negative effect on something he believed was wo rking well.  Ms. Deatre Denion (Department of 
Community Affairs) responded that the new legislation was promoted by the green industry in an effort to 
expand conservation programs beyond outdoor irrigation and that they endorsed the provisions of the Act.   

Chairman Cross asked if the Council would like  to develop a future organization to monitor 
implementation progress of the Plan and continue with  regional planning efforts.   Mr. Larson advised 
that there has been no official plan for the Council to continue beyond the current term. However, the 
Council could decide to develop a future organization.   Chairman Cross suggested that there be a group 
for the Savannah River basin including parties from Georgia and South Carolina.  Chairman Cross stated 
his desire for the development of a Savannah River  basin coalition.  He is planning on contacting all 
bordering governments in Georgia and South Carolina to form a permanent group.  His thoughts were that 
the group would begin as a public sector entity with  county commission chairs and mayors.  They would 
then decide if they wanted to add other potential stakeholders. 

Q: How is this Plan going to affect future utilities coming into the region (specifically power utilities)? 
Chairman Cross responded that similar to the old wa y of determining future water availability but the 
Plan would be used as a starting point.  The thermoelectric facility in the region, Plant Vogtle, will double 
its water use in the next 10 years.   EPD incorporated  water withdrawals associated with Plant Vogtle into 
the future water use projections.    

Mr. Martello commented that grant money is  available through the 319 program with $100,000 
designated for each planning council (application deadlin e January 31, 2011).  The grant money must be 
matched with 40% local funding (60% grant).  EPD  suggested that projects proposed to be partially 
funded through the 319 program be included with th e Plan.   Ms. Denion pointed out local governments 
could use in-kind services for the funding match.   Sam Booker (public) suggested the local adopt-astream programs promoted by EPD.  He stated that  if a county already had a program, the current budget 
could be used as the matching fund for the grant.   Mr. Martello stated that interested members could 
contact Chris Faulkner (EPD 319 coordinator) at  404.675.1628 and an EPD prepared handout was 
provided to the Council. 

The Council discussed revising the goal that restricts  interbasin transfers.  Chairman Cross recommended 
no interbasin transfers out of the Savannah River  for supporting economic growth of communities outside 
the river basin, especially to the detriment of comm unities within the basin.  The available water should 
be used to continue meeting future basin needs.  It  was pointed out that interbas in transfers already exist 
with those near Greenville, South Carolina, from  Lake Keowee (owned by Duke Power). Also, a 
proposed biomass electric generation plant in Warren  County (in the Ogeechee River Basin) plans to use 
reclaimed water from the City of Thomson (Savanna h River Basin) for cooling purposes.  Chairman  

Cross talked about how we could discourage interbasin  transfers from the Savannah River.  Mr. Martello 
noted that there is a Public Notice on an EPD proposed  rule change regarding interbasin transfers with a 
DNR board public hearing scheduled for Jan 5 th, 2011.  Chairman Cross mentioned that some believed 
that the language of the proposed rule should be changed from "should" to "shall" to make the statements 
more mandatory.  Mr. Larry Walker suggested that  the Council send a letter and include comments on 
interbasin transfer.  Mr. Pat Goran brought up that  the Council had already said they were adamantly 
against interbasin transfer.  Chairman Cross said th at the Plan's language would need to be reworked 
concerning interbasin transfer for adoptability of the  Plan. The Plan still could show that the Council is 
against interbasin transfer, but the Council would no t be allowed to ban it entirely.  Chairman Cross 
received consensus that the Council would provide comments to EPD on the proposed rule change.  

PC Martello discussed the meeting agenda and objectives.  
2) Committee Review & Updates  
Mr. Martello stated that the Plan Review Committee  (chaired by Bruce Azevedo) had been working with 
the PC on reviewing the draft Plan as sections were updated.  

Tom Wiedmeier noted that the Technical Committee  had been involved in selection of management 
practices for the Plan.  The committee is aware  that EPD has responded to the initial proposed 
management practices and has requested additional conservation measures be specified.  Braye Boardman 
suggested that Georgia and South Carolina share th e Savannah River and everyone needs to be conscious 
of efficient water use.  Mr. Wiedmeier discussed management practices and how the management 
practices were selected based on the goal to closing gaps within the region.  Vice-Chair Charlie Newton 
was concerned that if management practices not required for closing gaps were included in the Plan, those 
management practices would be used for pe rmitting conditions and ma y end up hurting local 
governments.  Mr. Goran indicated there had been some confusion within the Council regarding the 
relationship between planning and regulatory compliance and how the Water Stewardship Act fits into the 
State Water Planning effort. 

The Council's Interstate Coordination Committee h as been involved with the Savannah River Basin 
Advisory Council and Scott McGregor  attended the last meeting in South Carolina on December 8.  Scott 
Willett of Anderson Regional Joint Water System su mmarized the key items that were discussed:  a 
presentation from the USACE on the Comprehensive 2 Plan, Level 4 Drought Operating Plan (which 
would be their emergency action plan during severe dr ought), and the expansion of the Savannah Harbor. 
There was a presentation from the Thurmond Institute (Clemson University) on their analysis of lake 
level impacts on the economy for communities surrou nding Lake Hartwell, and a presentation from Duke 
Power on relicensing process for the facility at Lake  Keowee and the stream modeling being done in 
conjunction with the USACE. 

Mr. Martello discussed the ad hoc meeting held on December 7 concerning Environmental Flow policy.  
EPD currently allows three options on minimum in stream flow (monthly 7Q10, percentage of mean 
annual flow, or site specific studies) and this issu e is receiving further study and analysis.  Minimum 
instream flows are typically determined based on either monthly 7Q10 flow or natural flow (whichever is 
less). This is how current water withdrawal permits are issued but this may change in the future.    

It was noted that the TMDL stakeholders group has  met, selected a facilitator, and are moving forward 
toward a mutually agreeable TMDL implementation plan. 

3) Draft Plan Review and Management Practices  
Mr. Martello provided an overview of the management practices specific to surface water quantity gaps at 
the Eden Node and at the Little Tennessee Node.   Management practices for closing assimilative capacity 
(surface water quality) gaps were also discussed.   Programmatic and regulatory management practices 
were reviewed, especially those critical to implementing water conservation and water use efficiency.  
Management practices are divided in the draft Plan as  Priority Practices  and  Additional Recommended 
Practices.  

Q: Concerning WS1, Mr. Walker was not sure if a  feasibility study could be considered a management 
practice and that this management practice may need to  be removed or written in the Plan in a different 
way.  

Vice Chair Newton asked if the feasibility study is n eeded to determine cost, who would be responsible 
for such a cost?  He commented that the way th e management practice is written gives agricultural 
stakeholders flexibility in the management practice.  

Mr. Martello presented the  Implementation Schedule and  Benchmarks for all of the priority management 
practices and discussed how they were organized.  

Q: What about groundwater wells affecting river level?  
Mr. Martello responded that this was why site specific investigation is necessary for groundwater sources.  
Q: Is the Little Tennessee gap a future gap and not current gap? 
Mr. Martello responded that the gap does not currently  exist.  The water dema nd forecast assumed future 
demand using the capacity of an existing Rabun County withdrawal permit for muni cipal or industrial use 
and this may affect the available instream flows in the future.  

Mr. Wiedmeier expressed concerns about the mana gement practice suggesting moratorium on septic 
systems being too harsh and suggested the language  be revised. There was general consensus from the 
Council. 

Mr. Boardman questioned the definition of "Master Plan" in WQ1 and WS6. 
Mr. Martello responded that it refers to community/s ystem specific Water and W astewater Master Plans 
and not a Comprehensive Plan.  

Mr. Walker brought up the fact that Rabun had high  unaccounted for water (UAW) and wanted to make 
sure UAW is addressed in the management practices.  Ms. Denion discussed new requirements on 
programs (annual water audit) for UAW in the Water Stewardship Act. 

Mr. Boardman asked why the 90-day extension was gi ven?  Mr. Martello stated that other councils 
requested more time.   

Chairman Cross suggested that the Council hold a  joint meeting with the Coastal Georgia Council in 
January.  

4) Schedule for Completion  
Mr. Martello closed the meeting by asking everyone  to review the draft Plan and submit comments to 
him.  It is proposed that the next council meeting be  scheduled during the first week in February.   He 
proposed several interim milestones:  

\Gamma   Week of January 10 - Technical Committee and  Plan Review Committee meet to compile 

preliminary comments. 

\Gamma   Week of January 17 - Compile all Council comments  and suggest modifications.  Distribute revised 

draft Plan to Council (end of January). 

\Gamma   February 3 - Hold Council Meeting #9.  Review a nd discuss proposed modifications to draft Plan.  

Obtain Council concurrence with changes. 

\Gamma   February 15 - Prepare final draft Plan for submittal to EPD. 
5) Elected Official and Public Comments  
Chairman Cross asked if there were any final comments, and there were none. 

6) Meeting Wrap-up  
Chairman Cross thanked the Council members for atte nding the meeting.  Chairman Cross thanked Vice 
Chairman Newton for coordinating the meeting space and the meeting was adjourned. 

7) Action Items 

\Gamma   PC to draft response to EPD on proposed interbasin transfer rule change 
\Gamma   PC to provide location for Council Meeting #9 
\Delta   PC to draft modified language for the interbasin transfer goal for Council review  

CM#8 Meeting Attendees  
Council Members in attendance 
Ron Cross, Chair 
Braye Boardman 
Jerry Boling 
Don Dye 
Mike Eskew 
Dan Fowler (Alternate) 
Pat Goran (Alternate) 
Toye Hill 
Tom Jordan 
Chris McCorkle 
Tim McGill 
Charlie Newton 
Larry Walker 
Lee Webster 
Tom Wiedmeier 
 
 
Council Members not in attendance Bruce Azevedo 

Charles Cawthon 
Deke Copenhaver 
Barry Cronic 
Patricia Goodwin (Alternate) 
Larry Guest 
Ralph Hudgens (Ex-Officio) 
Robert Jenkins 
Scott MacGregor 
Eddie Madden 
James H. Newsome 
Lewis Sanders 
Stan Sheppard 
Tom McCall (Ex-Officio) 
Tenia Workman 
 
Staff in attendance Jeff Larson, EPD 

Brian Baker, EPD 
Bill Martello, Jacobs 
Rita Kelly, Jacobs  
 
 

Partnering Agencies in attendance  Robert Amos, Georgia Soil & Water Conservation 
Patti Lamford, Georgia DNR, Water Resources Division 
Deatre Denion, Department of Community Affairs 
 
General Public in attendance 
Doug Fulle, Oglethorpe Power Corporation 
Frank Carl, Savannah River Keeper 
Sam Booker 
Scott Willett, Anderson Regional Joint Water 
Katherine Cummings, FACE  Rita.Kelly 52 32 9 6 0 111 4 5 0  -18000 Georgia Department of Natural Resources SUO_CM8_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 8.1 for Word 