

1 
 

Georgia Department of Natural Resources 

Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 

Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 FAX: 404/675-6247  

  
May 12, 2009  
M E M O R A N D U M  
 TO:    Council Members  
     FROM:  Bill Martello, JJG 

Jeff Larson, GA EPD  
SUBJECT:  Council Meeting Summary     Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting 
 CC:    David Ashley, JJG 
    Tai-Yi Su, JJG Heather Dyke, CH2M HILL 

Inga Kennedy, PEQ  
     Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan 

Regional Water Planning  
Council Meeting 1 Summary  
Meeting Date:  May 7, 2009 
Location:   Savannah Rapids Pavilion 
Attendees:  See List 
 

1) Registration  
Registration period from 9:00 to 9:30 
Meeting called to order at 9:32 by Bill Martello, Planning Consultant. 
2) Welcome and Introductions/Approve Agenda 
Martello introduced Ron Cross and Pat Goodwin for the official meeting welcome. 
  

2 
 

Cross recognized local officials present from the area. 
Martello asked members to introduce themselves and their roles.  Jeff Larson introduced himself as the 
assigned EPD representative/liaison to the council. 

3) Recap Water Planning Councils Kick-off Meeting 
Martello asked for show of hands for attendance at kickoff meeting.  Martello then briefly provided an 
overview of the kickoff meeting and results of the meeting evaluations. 

\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Pi \Sigma  \Lambda \Upsilon \Xi \Phi  \Psi \Omega fffiflffff\Xi \Psi  \Delta ffi\Xi \Phi \Psi \Delta  ffl\Sigma \Theta  \Lambda \Sigma \Psi \Delta ijff `\Xi \Xi \Lambda \Omega \Phi ffi \Delta \Phi \Psi  \Lambda \Upsilon \Xi  `\Xi \Xi \Lambda \Omega \Phi ffi \Sigma \Phi \Xi  ffl\Theta \Delta `\Xi '\Sigma \Theta ^* '\Upsilon \Omega fi\Upsilon  \Omega \Phi fi\Pi fl\Psi \Xi ff
MOA, operating procedures, and election of Chair/co-Chair. 

Martello asked for questions or changes to the agenda. 
Facilitator Inga Kennedy addressed any housekeeping issues, e.g. nominations throughout the day for 
Chair/Vice-Chair; for guests who signed in, a public comment sheet will be passed around for sign up 
later this afternoon; discussion of how members wish to receive information (via mail, email, etc.); 
scheduling for upcoming meeting dates and potential locations. 

4) Explanation of the Water Planning Process 
Martello began discussion of the water planning process, including an overview of the regional water 
planning stakeholders (regional water planning councils, regional planning contractors, local government 
\Delta \Psi _\Omega ff\Sigma \Theta i *\Sigma \Psi i* ,fl*\Pi \Omega fi* \Sigma \Lambda \Upsilon \Xi \Theta  '\Delta \Lambda \Xi \Theta  ,\Pi \Delta \Phi \Phi \Omega \Phi ffi fi\Sigma fl\Phi fi\Omega \Pi ff* ssaeoeo/* \Lambda \Upsilon \Xi  ff\Lambda \Delta ^\Xi \Upsilon \Sigma \Pi \Psi \Xi \Theta ffj \Theta \Sigma les and responsibilities. 

One council member mentioned that he has attended another regional council meeting and that they are 
eager to work together. 

Martello presented the timeline, schedule, and meeting agenda, quarterly meetings with defined topics 
and goals over the next 2 years.  No questions from council members about the schedule. 

Martello then began discussion of the water planning process.  Water resource assessments, forecasts and 
public participation all lead into the regional plan development (following a template generated by the 
EPD so all plans follow the same format), which then moves through the approval process (EPD and 
consensus among the regional planning council).  The results will assess the environmental and economic 
progress and agency decision-making.  The focus today will be on the forecasts (population and 
employment statistics, agricultural needs, and land cover. 

Question: Are the same guidelines in place now to work in conjunction with statutes that are currently in 
place?  Are we changing existing laws? 

Response:  The intent is to work within current statutes and rules. However, if the Council feels statutes 
or rules should be amended, that can be vetted. 

Question:  Are we planning to take existing water levels and release schedules into account? 
Response:  There are a lot of players and factors involved.  This process will address and tackle some of 
the complicated issues (inter-council deliberations, US Army Corps releases).  

3 
 

 
Question: Could we get clarification in writing in case the council determines some issues that might 
have an impact on state laws? 

Response: We will determine what we think is needed as we go through the planning process. 
Question:  Wo\Gamma \Delta \Theta  \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Xi  \Sigma \Xi  \Upsilon  \Phi \Psi \Gamma \Omega fffi\Phi \Theta  \Sigma \Xi \Theta fl\Xi \Xi \Gamma  fl\Lambda \Upsilon \Theta  \Theta \Lambda \Xi  \Phi \Psi ffi\Gamma \Phi fiff ffl\Xi i\Xi ff\Psi j` \Upsilon \Gamma ffl \Phi ffi\Pi \Pi \Xi \Gamma \Theta  `\Theta \Upsilon \Theta \Xi  ff\Upsilon fl`' 
Response:  Not anticipated but EPD will address issues/conflicts if they occur. 
Question:  Statute of concern is the MNGWPD interbasin transfers? 
Response:  Restrictions on interbasin transfers are recognized. 
Question: Can each council get a drought contingency plan with the Corps and address interbasin 
transfers to South Carolina?  Can we get this information? 

Response:  The drought contingency plan is available on the Corps website.  The South Carolina basin 
will be a part of this planning process. 

The consultant team will provide the council members with copies of the Corps Drought Contingency 
Plan and permitted South Carolina withdrawals . 

Martello opened the floor to other questions. 
Question: We need to understand the amount allowed for interbasin transfers and the flexibility allowed 
by the council in making recommendations for statute changes. 

5) MOA, Operating Procedures, and Rules for Meetings 
Larson moved on to discuss the MOA ^ Council responsibilities (first action item today is to adopt 
operating procedure and rules for the meetings); EPD responsibilities, DCA responsibilities. 

Larson discussed Operating Procedures and Rules for Meetings.   The council will identify any desired 
\Phi \Lambda \Upsilon \Gamma *\Xi ` \Theta \Psi  \Theta \Lambda \Xi  \Psi j\Xi \Pi \Upsilon \Theta fi\Gamma * j\Pi \Psi \Phi \Xi fflffi\Pi \Xi ` \Upsilon \Gamma ffl _\Xi \Xi \Theta fi\Gamma * \Pi ffiff\Xi ` fi\Gamma  \Theta \Psi ffl\Upsilon *\Delta ` _\Xi \Xi \Theta fi\Gamma *, ss\Theta  \Theta \Lambda \Xi  \Gamma \Xi ae\Theta  _\Xi \Xi \Theta fi\Gamma *oe o/AEOE flfiffff
provide feedback on the proposed changes; the documents will then be finalized and the members will be 
asked to sign the MOA.  Larson asked for questions from the floor.  There were no questions or 
comments. 

Kennedy led exercises on the planning process: Exercise 1, Operating Procedures/Rules for Meetings 
Broad Issues Areas, pertained to the review of the MOA.  Each table was assigned a group number and 
the part of the MOA they would be responsible for discussing.  Each table was asked to designate a 
spokesperson to lead discussion.  The groups were given 40 minutes to complete the first exercise. 

Kennedy reconvened the groups for discussion on Exercise 1. 
Work Group 1 (Operating Procedures for Council Leadership): 2/3 vote of meeting members present 
required for leadership approval.  The procedures call for a 6-month term for Chair and Vice-Chair.  
Recommendation is to make term 1 year to capture more meetings and allow for re-election.  Discussion:  

4 
 

If you leave term at 6-month and allow for re-election, then there is no issue.  Recommendation: Group 
recommends annual election of officers.   

Work Group 2 (Operating Procedures for Meetings and Governance, part 1): Would like for the technical 
team to provide a scribe for the meetings.  The Chair is responsible for calling the meetings.  Would 
follow 24-hour notice for public attendance for called meetings.  Discussion: Will 24-hour notice work to 
encourage and obtain public involvement?  All meetings will be open to the public abiding by the Open 
Records Act.  Questions regarding how can a 24-hour notice coincide with newspaper publication 
schedules?  Kennedy and other members answered that there are other ways to notify the public and the 
council can still notify the newspapers of a meeting.  Recommendations:  Add Chair as the person who 
can call meetings.  

Kennedy briefly deviated from group discussion to ask guests who is from public and how they were 
notified of meeting.  One person mentioned a council member notified him and that a meeting notice was 
run in the Augusta newspaper. 

Work Group 3 (Operating Procedures for Meetings and Governance, part 2): Agreed with actions 
regarding quorum, consent, resignation of Chair, subcommittees.  Discussion: This document states that 
the entire council to appoint subcommittees.  Recommendation: The Chair has the authority to appoint 
subcommittees. 

Work Group 4 (Rules for Meetings): Issues: Subsection E, how to address dealing with the media.  
Possibly develop bullet points capturing highlights of each meeting to disseminate to the public and to 
keep everyone on the same page.  Recommendation:  provide council members with meeting summary 
of what was discussed, decisions made, and topics to be discussed at next meeting.  Also, include web 
address to refer back to website for information.  Any minutes distributed prior to board approval should 
be indicated they are draft minutes of the meeting.  One person should be the spokesperson for the 
\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Xi \Theta \Sigma \Sigma \Upsilon \Phi \Psi \Omega  fffifl \Delta ffi\Xi ffl\Psi \Upsilon i\Upsilon \Sigma \Theta j` fffifl \Sigma 'i^^ *\Upsilon \Psi \Psi  \Phi ffi '_ffi *ffi,\Upsilon i \Delta ffi\Xi \Delta ffi\Sigma ffij'i'\Upsilon ssffi ^\Theta \Delta  '_ffi \Xi \Psi ijj\Upsilon j\Gamma  ae\Theta \Lambda jae\Upsilon \Psi `
The council members should distinguish between individual and council thoughts when talking with the 
media. 

Also, length of meetings - adjourn meetings if business is finished before end time indicated on agenda to 
respect the time of everyone present. 

oe\Theta \Delta o/ AE\Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi  OE O/\Lambda \Psi ffi\Sigma  \Theta ^ !\Theta j,\Lambda ae'"# fi\Theta \Sigma \Sigma \Upsilon \Phi \Psi \Omega  i,,\Delta ffi\Sigma \Sigma  \Lambda \Psi ffi $% \Xi \Lambda \Phi \Psi \Upsilon ae \Upsilon jss\Theta \Psi ssffi*ffij'% ,\Theta ffi\Sigma j&' i,,\Delta ffi\Sigma \Sigma  _\Theta *
public comment will be addressed and how they will be documented as part of council discussion.  
Discussion: Possibly include public comments summarized at end of council meeting summary.  The 
public should sign up prior to beginning of meeting and should be allotted 3-minute comment period at 
the end of each meeting.  Alternatively, the public may not have any comment until after they have heard 
the council discussion.  If someone comes prepared with comment, they could possibly provide written 
comment.  The public comment period is simply to obtain input and will not be a Q & A session.  The 
comments will be summarized and addressed at a later time.  Adopt 3 minute per person time limit on 
comment. 

Kennedy led council members in Exercise 2, Achieving Results through Consensus Decision Making.  
The working groups were instructed to Response the 3 questions in the exercise and the group 
spokesperson report back to entire body.  The groups were given 10 minutes to complete the exercise.  

5 
 

 
Kennedy reconvened the group to discuss exercise 2: 
Work Group 1: A minority opinion should be captured in the meeting minutes.  Consensus is when 
something passes and no one is completely happy. 

Work Group 2:  Completely agree with Work Group 1. 
Work Group 3:  Consensus is a simple majority and that every vote should be recorded.  Consensus will 
\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Gamma \Xi  \Pi \Lambda  \Sigma \Upsilon \Lambda \Phi \Psi \Lambda \Upsilon  \Psi \Omega \Phi ff \Phi  fi\Delta flffi\Gamma \Lambda  fl\Phi ffli\Upsilon \Delta \Psi \Xi  i\Upsilon  j`' ^i\Psi \Lambda * _\Delta fi*,fifi\Delta iffss\Delta ae oeo/AE \Delta fi \Phi \Gamma \Gamma  \Psi \Omega \Phi \Psi  \Psi \Omega \Lambda  \Sigma \Upsilon i,ffi *\Phi ff \Sigma \Lambda \Psi OE
maybe the issue should not be decided upon.  Policy decisions should be based on 2/3 quorum. 

Work Group 4:  Should guidance and time limit be given to the Chair on how long a discussion should go 
to arrive at consensus? Possibly leave it to the discretion of the Chair, who may direct a sub-committee to 
further discuss unresolved issues. 

Work Group 5: Believes that consensus is a 5.5 instead of a 7 on the scale. 
The council was adjourned for 30 minutes for lunch. (@ 12:16) 
The council was reconvened at 1:15. 
6) Present Website Capabilities 
Martello discussed the EPD website capabilities on the Georgia State Water Plan with recent news, 
regions in the state, quick links, and latest documents.  EPD will also setup individual regional water 
council sites.  The websites are in working progress.  The website should be launched within the next 
couple of weeks.  EPD has a link on its homepage with the Georgia Statewide Water Planning activities 
and information. 

Question: Is previous work that Bob Kerr did over a decade ago available to post on the website? 
The consultant team will research the prior work to see what information is available and other basin 
plans currently available on EPD website for council review. 

7) Regional Geography, Facilities, and Resources Overview 
Martello led discussion on regional geography, facilities, and resources overview.  This discussion 
included information on total population by region (2007 estimates), total population within the region by 
county (2007).  Five sets of regional issues were discussed O/ 16 high priority streams in the planning 
region, protected species, significant recreational use (boating and fishing); potential threats to water in 
the region include urbanization, fragmentation and flow alteration from reservoirs, and non-point source 
pollution; regional stakeholder groups, ongoing conservation challenges.   

Martello showed a map of the region with preliminary information from EPD on groundwater sources, 
NPDES permits and surface water intakes/withdrawals.   

Statistics: 

  38 surface water permits  

6 

 

\Gamma   336 MGD total permitted flow (monthly average flow) 
\Gamma   43 groundwater withdrawal permits 
\Gamma   56 MGD total permitted flow 
\Gamma   831 agricultural water withdrawal permits 
\Gamma   121,558 acres total irrigation area 
\Gamma   4.5 M acres in the basin 
\Gamma   58.6% forested  

Wastewater permits by county (major/minor) 

\Gamma   207 permitted discharges (total number of permits and breakdown by owner type - majority from municipal WW systems 

\Delta  by type)  

\Gamma   90.2 MGD total flow    

Question: Is South Carolina taken into account with this data?  The data does not take into account South 
Carolina.  The volume appears to be inaccurate from the total flow from industrial owners?    

Response: An assumed flow may not have been reflected in the data.   
The consultant team will investigate along with EPD. 
8) Trends, Forces, and Factors that will affect the Future of Water in the Region/Implications of Trends 
for the Region and Regional Plan 

Martello then moved on to trends, forces, and factors and the implications.  Martello asked each council 
member to generate 1-2 ideas individually as to what are the trends, forces, and factors that will be 
affecting the future of water in the region (1 idea per sheet). 

The ideas were grouped together and the clusters were named as follows: 

\Gamma   Economic development (business development, industrial and manufacturing growth/decline) 
\Gamma   Federal projects/lake management (river flows and Corps discharges) 
\Gamma   Interbasin transfers 
\Gamma   TMDLs (tmdl, oxygen levels, mercury levels)  
\Gamma   Shared resources (population growth, water usage, SC/interstate water usage) 
\Gamma   Regulatory (water conservation/regulation, drought, agricultural irrigation) 
\Gamma   Non-point source pollution 
\Gamma   Drought/climate conditions 
\Gamma   Agriculture 
\Gamma   Groundwater impacts/availability  

Discussion ensued among council members to further flush out the cluster categories regarding 
population growth, runoff, etc. 

Data needs from consultant team: historic rainfall data  

7 
 

Kennedy then asked the council members to take the cluster categories to develop a story of water for the 
region.  Water Management for Growth (Water management, drought/climate conditions, water supply to 
support Metro Atlanta growth) 

9) Introduction to Population and Employment Forecasts 
Martello then moved on to a current and historical context of population and workforce.  Martello 
\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Sigma \Pi  \Upsilon \Phi \Psi \Phi \Xi \Upsilon \Phi \Xi \Omega \Psi ff \Xi fifl\Theta \Delta ffi\Psi \Phi \Xi \Theta fi \Theta fi \Phi ffl\Sigma  \Upsilon \Phi \Psi \Phi \Sigma i\Upsilon  j\Delta \Theta `\Phi ffl \Phi \Delta \Sigma fi\Pi \Upsilon ' 

Question:  One thing to look at is what jobs have an impact on water usage. 
Response: The Carl Vinson Institute is looking at total employment, statewide population growth, 
regional trends in population and employment. 

Martello then discussed methods for forecasting population and employment.   
Question: Will we breakdown our water consumption needs by users, based on population and 
employment forecasts?  How will forecasts from the Greenville/Spartanburg area be taken into 
consideration?   

Response: EPD will discuss forecasts with South Carolina.  Water consumption forecasts will be based 
on types of user categories. 

Question: How do we work with the Corps on lake management issues?   
Response: EPD is in discussion with the Corps, particularly regarding the water planning efforts, and it is 
an ongoing communication process. 

10) Election of Chair and Vice-Chair  
Kennedy led the council into the election of Chair and Vice-Chair.  The council was given a 5-minute 
break to finish nominations. 

Final Nominations: 
Chair            Vice Chair 
Ron Cross          Barry Cronic       
Mike Eskew          Donald Dye 
Chris McCorkel         Toye Hill 
Stan Sheppard          Charles Newton 
Tom Wiedmeyer        Stan Sheppard 

          Tom Wiedmeyer 
 
  

8 

 

Results: 
Chair \Gamma  Ron Cross  
Vice Chair \Gamma  Charles Newton 
Evaluation forms were distributed. 
11) Public comments 
Peyton Sapp, UGA Cooperative Extension, reiterated assistance to the committee. 
Mike Ronick thanked the committee for the work, the use of the facility and lunch.   

\Delta   Would like for the committee to operate under Roberts Rules of Order? 
\Delta   Would like for the committee to address who would handle interstate commerce (the buy/sell interstate sale of water)? 

\Delta   Agricultural ponds may not get credit for return of water through discharge when flows are small.  

12) Action Items 

\Delta   Planning contractor to send Council correspondence via email to choose 3 dates and locations for the next 3 meetings. 
\Delta   Planning Contractor to provide Council with Corps Drought Contingency Plan. 
\Delta   Planning Contractor/EPD staff to provide Council with current South Carolina withdrawals. 
\Delta   Planning Contractor to provide Council with previous work from Bob Kerr or other plans 
\Delta   Planning Contractor to check on industrial flow numbers. 
\Delta   Planning Contractor/EPD to provide Council with historic rainfall data.  

Meeting adjourned at 3:24 PM. 
 Meeting Attendees 
 
Council Members: 
Bruce Azevedo 
Braye Boardman  
Charles Cawthon 
Ron Cross 
Donald Dye 
Mike Eskew 
Dan Fowler 
Patricia Goodwin 
Patrick Goran 
Larry Guest 
Toye Hill 
Robert Jenkins 
Scott MacGregor  

9 
 

Eddie Madden 
Chris McCorkel 
Tim McGill 
James H. Newsome 
Charles Newton 
Lewis Sanders 
Stan Sheppard 
Larry Walker 
Tom Wiedmeyer 
R. Lee Webster  
Rep. Tom McCall 
 
Partnering Agencies and General Public John Pearson, Sr. 

Bob Masse 
Michael Ronick 
Charles Rice 
Rob Pavey 
Frank Carl 
Jim Hussey  
Nancy Bobbitt 
Charles Phillips 
Sam Booker 
*Peyton Sapp (UGA Cooperative Extension) 
*Robert Amos (Georgia Soil Water Conservation Commission (GASWCC)) 
*John Colberg (Georgia Forestry Commission (GFC)) 
*Rick Hubert (Georgia Farm Bureau (GFB)) 
*Rahn Milligan (GAWSCC) 
*Deatre Denson (Dept of Community Affairs (DCA)) 
*Gary Black (Georgia Agribusiness) 
 

*Indicates attendee represented an agency 
 

  
   Clay.Zielinski 17 13 14 20 4 109 3 139 1 EDT NA Georgia Department of Natural Resources SUO_CM1_Summary.pdf en  