 

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
  August 2011  Final Production of Adopted WDCP 

September 30, 2011  GA EPD Approves Upper Flint Regional WDCP 
 Overview of Plan Revisions 
Kristin Rowles referred to the April 7th review draft of the plan.  She said that changes in this draft included: minor edits (such as grammar or formatting), references, revisions 
based on decisions at the last council meeting, and revisions based on committee work since the last council meeting.  She said that the committee work related changes would 
be discussed in committee reports. She said that the Council could make changes today as needed during the meeting, and if necessary, follow-up by the Plan Review Committee 
next week is possible.  
Next, Kristin reviewed major changes in each of the sections:  

Sections 1 & 2 

\Gamma   New maps in Sections 1 and 2 
\Gamma   Clarifying notes and references 
\Gamma   Section 2, Page 2-4: 2006 Flint Plan clarification. Kristin said that this change, requested by EPD, clarified that the 2006 Flint Plan and this plan will be 

implemented together. 
\Gamma   Will add reference to Council meeting summaries  

Section 3 

\Gamma   Page 3-1 to 3-3: clarification on what is included in various forecasts 
\Gamma   Section 3.1:  

\Delta   Clarifying language on models 
\Delta   Statement of Council position on model assumptions for upstream reservoirs (page 3-5) [from last Council meeting] 

\Gamma   Section 3.2.2: Groundwater models were recalibrated, results will be discussed in the Water Quantity committee report later today [recommended 

by committee] 
\Gamma   Section 3.2.3: Discussion of nutrient modeling results [reviewed by Water Quality Committee; recommendations today] 

\Gamma   Section 3.3.1: Figure 3-6 \Delta  New impaired waters graphic 
\Gamma   Section 3.3.2 \Delta  Revisions proposed from Plan Review and Water Quality C

\Theta \Lambda \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Pi \Sigma \Sigma \Upsilon  \Phi \Psi \Upsilon \Sigma \Omega  \Theta ff fi\Xi fl\Xi \Upsilon \Xi \Theta ff \Theta ffi ffl\Xi i\Omega i\Xi ffi\Sigma  j\Sigma \Upsilon \Theta `'^\Sigma \Upsilon * ^\Theta \Lambda \Lambda \Sigma ff\Pi \Upsilon    

Section 4 

\Gamma   Section 4.3: clarification on what is included in agricultural water use forecasts  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 

\Gamma   Section 4.4: Thermoelectric Power Production Water Demand Forecasts \Delta  revised [reviewed by Water Quantity 

\Delta  recommend adoption (with modification)] 

 Section 5 

\Gamma   Section 5.2: New groundwater results; more explanation of meaning of results [recommended by committee] 
\Gamma    Section 5.3: Discussion of nutrient modeling results [reviewed by Water Quality Committee; recommendations today] 
\Gamma   Section 5.4 (page 5-6): Surface water and groundwater availability sections revised for consistency with other changes and from committee review 
 Section 6: Table 6-1 

\Gamma   Order of management practices and noting priority practices 
\Gamma   SF1 wording in description [Water Quantity Committee] 
\Gamma   Moved former WQ5 to Section 7.4 (coordination with other councils) [Plan Review Committee] 

 Section 6.2 

\Gamma   Page 6-10, last paragraph: revisions to address gap discussion and storage need [Water Quantity Committee; recommendation today] 
\Gamma   Page 6-11: New paragraph on water conservation \Delta  credit for prior implementation [last Council meeting] 
 Section 7 

\Gamma   Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule 
\Gamma   Table 7-2: Cost Estimates for Implementation 
\Gamma   Section 7.4: 

\Delta   Information needs: 5th bullet [W. Qual.], 7th bullet [W. Quant], last bullet [W. Qual.], nutrient modeling [forthcoming] 

\Delta   Water policy: 1st, 3rd, and 4th bullet points [last Council meeting], last three bullet points [Plan Review Committee] 
\Delta   Coordinated Recommendations with Neighboring Councils [last Council meeting] 
 Section 8 

\Gamma   Table 8-1: Benchmarks 
\Gamma   Section 8.4: Conclusion \Delta  emphasis on need to continue regional planning process [Plan Review Committee] 

\Gamma    Executive Summary and Supplemental Document 
\Gamma   Executive Summary to be developed next week  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 

\Gamma   Supplemental documents cited in plan and available on Upper Flint Council website 

 Kristin provided a list of the supplemental documents as a hand-out.  She said that these 
would be available on the Council website soon, and if any Council members would like to review any of these documents before then, let her know. 
 Vice-Chairman Morrow said in a recent GMA meeting he promoted the continuation of 
the regional water planning process, and he said that he believes there is support to continue the process.  Council member Beth English said that because the council 
members were political appointees, they can help make this process more visible to the proper channels.  Council member Buddy Leger said he had heard that the Commissioner 
of Agriculture was planning to meet with the chairmen of the councils. Michael Beres suggested it would be helpful if Council members reviewed the Upper Flint plan face-toface with legislative representatives. Council member Randall Starling suggested that the Council should remain active in promoting the plan and should meet again at some point 
in the future to monitor progress, even without planning contractors. Starling asked if there was anything they would have to do from a legal standpoint to have more meetings. 
Steve Simpson said the Memorandum of Agreement that the Council signed with EPD says that EPD should be notified.  
 Kristin explained that the Regional Water Plans will be released for public comment on 
May 9, 2011.  The comment period is expected to be 45 days. She said there is an Internet site for collecting comments on the regional water plans. The new website, for 
this purpose is called the Public Comment Collection Center (http://www.gaepdcommentcenter.org).  She said the link will also be available from 
www.georgiawaterplanning.org. Comments can also be submitted to EPD by mail, fax, and e-mail (see hand-out). She said that the comment website will allow the Council 
members to see what comments are being made on the plan. Use of the website requires registration. Chairman Chase asked if it was appropriate for council members to make 
comments. Kristin answered yes.  
Next, Council member Lamar Perlis asked the council to consider a change to one of the 
\Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Sigma \Upsilon  \Phi \Theta \Psi \Upsilon \Omega ff fifl \Omega \Lambda \Phi \Phi fl\Omega ffiflffl \Psi fflffl\Sigma \Xi \Phi  i\Pi \Theta jjfl`\Pi \Sigma \Psi \Upsilon ' ffi\Theta  ffi^fl \Upsilon \Sigma \Omega ffi \Theta * _\Psi ffifl` \Lambda \Omega \Sigma \Xi \Phi  \Omega fl\Pi ffi\Theta `\Omega  \Sigma \Xi Goal #4 so that it reads: 

   

Manage water resources sustainably through the *,ssaeae oeo/AEOEO/  conserving, capturing and controlling water 

 in order to provide for the needs of all water users in the region (agriculture, utilities, residential, commercial, industry, 

forestry, and recreation).  
This revision was approved by the Council by consensus.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
  

Water Quantity Committee Report and Recommendations  
Council member Cliff Arnett, Chair of Water Quantity Committee, thanked the committee members for their efforts. He said that he has learned a lot about consensus 
through this process. Council member Buddy Leger thanked Arnett for his commitment and his time. 
 Arnett said the committee met on March 23, 2011, and the meeting summary for that 
meeting is in the pre-meeting packet.  The committee also met on April 12, 2011.  A summary of this meeting was handed out during the meeting.  Arnett said that both of 
these meetings involved discussing outstanding issues and finalizing the draft plan.  
First, Arnett explained references in the plan to resources shared with Satilla-Suwannee Council. The Upper Flint shares the Alapaha node in the Suwannee with this neighboring 
Council.  It is referenced on pages 3-5 and 5-2 and in Tables in Sections 6, 7, and 8 in the plan. Pages 50 & 51 of pre-meeting packet are copies of pages in the Suwannee-Satilla 
plan \Gamma \Delta \Theta \Gamma  \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Xi \Lambda \Xi \Sigma \Upsilon \Xi  \Gamma \Delta \Xi  \Phi \Psi \Psi \Xi \Lambda  \Omega fffi\Sigma \Gamma  flffiffl\Sigma \Upsilon fiffij `\Theta \Sigma \Theta '\Xi `\Xi \Sigma \Gamma  \Psi \Lambda \Theta \Upsilon \Gamma fi\Upsilon \Xi j \Gamma \Delta \Theta \Gamma  ^fiffff \Theta \Pi \Pi \Xi \Upsilon \Gamma  \Gamma \Delta fijnode. Arnett said the committee approved presentation of shared resources information 
and recommends adoption (as presented in April 7th review draft).  Chairman Chase asked for any more discussion and asked if there was consensus on approving the shared 
resource language.  The shared resources presentation in the plan was approved by consensus. 
  
  
Next, Arnett reviewed new groundwater results in the table below.  Arnett said both the Claiborne and Cretaceous aquifers were recalibrated based on more up-to-date use 
information.  He asked Kristin to explain the results. She said that the recalibration was conducted due to the availability of better information. She said that the results provided 
wider sustainable yield ranges for these aquifers.  She explained that the results are a range because the lower end of the range is based on a conservative assumption that use 
will increase uniformly across the aquifer, while the upper end of the range is based on an assumption of non-uniform increases in use.  The non-uniform assumption allows for 
more use because use can be limited in some areas where adverse impacts are projected by the model while allowing increased use in other parts of the aquifer where adverse 
impacts are not projected.  Section 3 compares the sustainable yield range to current estimates of use, for which there is also a range.  The lower end of the range for use 
estimates includes average year agricultural withdrawals, while the upper end of the range includes dry year agricultural withdrawals. Kristin said that the committee had 
asked for an improvement of an explanation of the results in the plan text, and the new  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 draft reflects revisions to the explanation to meet this request, as well as the revision to 

the results themselves.  These changes appear in Sections 3.1.1 and Section 5.1.  
The council then discussed model limitations. Concern with potential adverse impacts was noted, but Council members also have significant concerns about the accuracy of the 
models. Arnett said that for him, the answer is adaptive management. As we continue to learn about the system, we can revise the plan. 
 Chairman Chase asked for any more discussion and if there was consensus on the 
revisions related to the groundwater results.  The revisions were approved by consensus. 
 Next, Arnett reviewed a revision in Section 4.4: Thermoelectric Power Production Water 
Demand Forecasts. The Committee recommends that addition of a new sentence at the end of this section:  

The Upper Flint Council recommends that as a part of water withdrawal permitting decisions for new thermoelectric power production or any other waterintensive industry, a thorough evaluation should be conducted to determine if an adequate and sustainable water supply is available to meet the demands of the 
new permittee.   
Council member Mike Donnelly said that this is consistent with the process a utility would follow in siting a new power plant. Chairman Chase asked for any more discussion 
and if there was consensus on this language.  The revision to Section 4.4 was approved by consensus. 
 Next Arnett, noted a change in text on SF5 in Table 6-1 (page 6-6 of the plan) which 
changed fro\Gamma \Delta  \Theta Addressing the surface water availability gap at Bainbridge may require 
\Lambda \Xi \Pi  \Sigma \Upsilon \Upsilon \Phi \Lambda \Phi \Psi \Omega  \Psi ff fi\Lambda \Psi fl\Sigma ffi\Pi ffli tj\Delta  \Theta Eliminating the surface water availability gap at Bainbridge will require the addition of storage

`' ^*_ Committee recommends adopting this revision.  Chairman Chase if there was consensus on this language.  The revision 

was approved by consensus.   
Next, Arnett reviewed several other revisions, including:  

*  High priority management practices listed 1st in each section in Table 6-1 
*  After Surface Water Availability on page 5-6:  

,  ss*aeoeo/_ \Theta ssAEjOE_ O/*_ o/ae` O/j \Theta !""#_OEOE O/*_ o/ae`   
,  Added last sentence of same paragraph to note storage needs/recommendation 

*  Page 8-1, 1st ae#aeo/#ae*$ AE%oe_ &\Delta  ss*aeoeo/_" \Theta 'AEjOE%oeo/ o/aeOE` O/j \Theta ae""#_OEOE%oeo/ o/aeOE` 
*  Page 7-15, 7th ()AEAE_O/ j%oeO/\Delta  *_AE_O/_" O/*_ AEaeOEO/ OE_oeO/_oe'_$ +*%'* #_ae"\Delta  \Theta ,)#O/*_#\Gamma j#_$the Council recommends the analysis of alternative structural hydraulic measures  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
  such as temporary weirs, gates, and/or steps to control river stage and sediment 

transport and scour at or \Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi  \Pi \Lambda \Lambda \Sigma \Upsilon \Phi \Psi \Psi  \Omega fffi flffi \Lambda \Upsilon \Sigma \Delta \Upsilon  ffl\Lambda  i\Upsilon \Lambda ffl\Delta jffl j\Upsilon flfflfljff\Theta  `ff\Gamma flfflffffl'^  The Committee recommends adoption of these revisions (as presented in April 7th review 
draft). Chairman Chase asked if there was any more discussion and if there was consensus on approving this language.  There was no additional discussion on these 
revisions, and they were approved by consensus.  
Next, Arnett said that the committee recommended new revisions (not reflected in the April 7th review draft) that will present the 

*_ffi*^ ffl`\Upsilon \Lambda \Phi _`\Lambda \Phi ffl ffl`\Delta  i\Theta ffffi ff* *fi\Lambda \Sigma \Delta \Theta \Delta \Sigma  _ffi*^
ffffi\Sigma  *_ffi* fl\Sigma \Delta ffifflfl\Psi fl\Delta \Sigma  \Gamma , ffl`\Delta  fi\Lambda \Sigma \Delta \Theta ^. The Committee recommends adoption of this revision.  The revision was approved by consensus. 

 
ss\Delta aeffloe o/\Upsilon ffi\Delta fflffl i\Upsilon \Delta *\Delta ffiffl\Delta \Sigma  ffl`\Delta  j\Lambda fififlfflffl\Delta \Delta AE* \Upsilon \Delta j\Lambda fifi\Delta ffi\Sigma fffflfl\Lambda ffi \Lambda ffi \Upsilon \Delta OEfl*flffi_ `\Lambda \Xi  ffl`\Delta  gap is presented and emphasiz

flffi_ ffl`\Delta  O/\Lambda \Phi ffijfl\Theta AE* storage recommendation. This recommendation revises the plan text on page 6-10 and 6-11 and Note 8 (page 6-10). The Committee 

discussed these revisions extensively.  The Committee recommends changing the last paragraph on page 6-10 to read:  

As  described  above,  the  Council  selected  management  practices  to  address  its vision  and  goals  and  gaps  by  the  resource  assessment  models.  However,  the 
implications of these gaps for other users, in-stream needs, and aquifer health are not fully understood; evaluation is needed to delineate and quantify the impacts of 
these gaps. Without a more complete understanding of severity of these impacts, the  Council  would  violate  its  own  vision  and  goals  if  it  were  to  recommend 
complete closing of the gaps at this time. The Council's vision and goals call for sustainable  management  of  water  resources  that  ensures  that  the  welfare  and 
needs  of  the  region  are  met.  They  call  for  providing  for  the  needs  of  all  users, while  protecting  the  economy,  public  health,  and  natural  systems,  and  they 
specifically  call  for  protection  of  the  forestry  and  agricultural  sectors  of  the regional  economy.  Complete  closure  of  the  gaps  would  require  complete 
cessation  of  water  withdrawals  by  agriculture  in  dry  periods  unless  and  until offsetting  storage  or  augmentation  are  implemented.  Even  with  complete 
cessation of water withdrawal by agriculture in dry periods, the entire gap cannot be  closed.  The  complete  cessation  of  consumptive  use  would  have  severe 
economic  impacts  for  water  users  in  the  region,  especially  agriculture,  and  the economic impact on the state would be devastating, as well. It would be a major 
\Xi ffffl\Delta \Upsilon  i\Lambda \Theta flj, *`fl\Psi ffl \Xi flffl` \Delta aeffl\Upsilon ff\Lambda \Upsilon \Sigma flffiff\Upsilon , flfii\Theta fljfffflfl\Lambda ffi* \Psi \Lambda \Upsilon  ffl`\Delta  \Upsilon \Delta _fl\Lambda ffiAE* \Delta j\Lambda ffi\Lambda fi, ffffi\Sigma quality  of  life.  Such  drastic  action  is  not  justified.  Construction  of  large-scale 
storage  or  augmentation  will  close  gaps  identified  by  the  model.  Therefore,  it  is 
ffl`\Delta  O/\Lambda \Phi ffijfl\Theta AE* i\Lambda *flfflfl\Lambda ffi ffl`ffffl ffl`\Delta  \Lambda ffi\Theta , \Xi ff, ffl\Lambda  *fffflfl*\Psi , ffl`\Delta  fi\Lambda \Sigma \Delta \Theta \Delta \Sigma  _ffi ffffl ffflffi\Gamma \Upsilon fl\Sigma _\Delta is to build one or more reservoirs in the Flint River Basin. 

 The Committee recommends adoption of these revisions. Council member Raines Jordan 
asked if the Council was recommending a reservoir on the mainstem of the river. Council  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 member Hays Arnold said that it does not say that. Cliff Arnett said that this wording 

says that if you do not build new storage in this region, do not talk to us about closing the gap. The gap will be there unless there is new storage. Vice-Chairman Morrow said the 
Council wants all options on the table and does not favor one reservoir option over another in the plan. He said that while he personally opposes a mainstem reservoir, he 
can support this statement. Council member Brant Keller said this plan section reinforces the explanation that you cannot close the gap by conservation alone. Buddy Leger said 
that a reservoir is needed if the gap is to be closed and the wording calls for storage in the Flint River Basin, not Flint River.  
 Mike Donnelly said that Jordan is correct: some readers will assume that we are 
supporting a dam on the mainstem of the river. Lamar Perlis asked if it is possible that storage might be needed for reasons other than closing the gap. Dick Morrow said that in 
this plan, the gap was the reason to recommend storage. Terrell Hudson said that this is a regional plan; a local plan might have other reasons to call for a new reservoir. Hays 
Arnold said that the region needs to keep its options open and be ready for the worst case scenario.  The Council further discussed whether the plan should call for storage for a 
reason other than the gap. Chairman Chase said that the plan does not preclude building a reservoir for other reasons, but those reasons are not within the purview of the Council 
and the Council should not overstep its responsibility. Cliff Arnett asked to call the question. Randy Starling reminded the group that it was deciding whether it could live 
with the plan language as presented.  Chairman Chase asked for a vote to ensure that support for these revisions was unanimous.  The Council votes unanimously in favor of 
the recommended revisions. It was clarified that the last sentence of the paragraph (ending on page 6-11) should be underlined in the plan. 
  
Water Quality Committee Report and Recommendations  
Committee Chair Raines Jordan thanked the Committee Members for their contributions.  He said the process has been exciting, thought provoking and educational for him.  He 
also commented about the need to keep this Council together to keep moving forward.  
Jordan explained that the committee had two Meetings. The March 7th meeting summary is in the pre-meeting packet (pages 34-41), and the April 7th meeting summary was 
provided as a hand-out. The committee reviewed the new nutrient model results, discussed outstanding issues and finalizing draft plan, discussed the 319 grant proposal 
from Two River RC&D, and \Gamma \Delta \Theta \Delta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Delta \Gamma  \Sigma \Delta \Upsilon \Xi \Phi \Phi \Delta \Psi \Gamma \Omega fffi\Xi \Psi fl ff\Xi  ffi\Xi ffl\Psi \Upsilon fi\Lambda  i\Xi \Sigma  ff\Xi \Gamma \Omega j`flmeeting. 
 Jordan 

\Pi \Sigma \Delta fl\Delta \Psi ff\Delta \Gamma  ff'\Delta  \Upsilon \Xi \Phi \Phi fiffff\Delta \Delta `fl \Sigma \Delta \Upsilon \Xi \Phi \Phi \Delta \Psi \Gamma \Omega fffi\Xi \Psi fl ff\Xi  ff'\Delta  ffi\Xi ffl\Psi \Upsilon fi\Lambda ^ *fi\Sigma flff_ fi\Psi  *\Delta \Upsilon fffi\Xi \Psi  ,^ss_the committee suggested a modified Information Need regarding assessment of baseline 

agricultural BMP implementation (5th bullet point, page 7-15).  Revision of this item was  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 referred back to the committee at the last Council meeting.  The committee recommends 

the following revised text:  

 Conduct a comprehensive assessment of baseline implementation of water conservation and water quality Best Management Practices (BMPs) by 
agricultural producers. The Council recognizes that state and federal agencies have existing programs that measure BMP implementation, but at this time, a 
comprehensive baseline assessment is lacking. A comprehensive field survey of BMP implementation, such as the one conducted periodically by the forestry 
industry, would support estimation of potential benefits of future implementation, tracking of implementation progress, and BMP prioritization.  
  There was no additional discussion on this revision, and it was approved by 
consensus.  
Next, Jordan said the committee suggested a modification to the introductory paragraph under Information Needs (page 7-14) as follows: 
  Addressing the following information needs would support improved water 

resources management and future water planning. Implementation of research and assessments to fill these needs will require funding (state, federal, other). 
Implementing agencies are not indicated here; if funding is identified, qualified researchers from state universities, institutions, and agencies, as well as private 
sector firms, can fulfill these information needs. As new information becomes available, it should be incorporated into future cycles of this regional water 
planning process, and the resource assessment models should be modified to reflect up-to-date information as it is developed.  
 This revision was approved by consensus. 
 Next, Jordan said the committee added a new bullet point under Information Needs 
(Section 7.4) regarding use designation:  

Evaluate the use designations assigned to stream reaches in the Upper Flint region as a part of the Triennial Review of Georgia Water Quality Standards. This 
review is intended to ensure that water quality performance criteria reflect actual conditions, in terms of both use and quality. 
 This revision was approved by consensus. 
 Next, Jordan explained that revisions to address comments received on Section 3 from 
the Division of Wildlife Resources (DWR) had been referred to this committee by the Plan Review Committee. The recommended revisions are presented on in Section 3.3.2  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 10  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 page 3-12 of the April 7th review draft.  Additionally, the list of rare aquatic species 

provided by DWR on page 48 of the pre-meeting packet will be added to a supplemental document to the plan. Chairman Chase asked if D

\Gamma \Delta  \Theta \Lambda \Xi  \Lambda \Theta \Lambda \Pi \Sigma  \Upsilon \Phi  \Psi \Omega \Sigma  ff\Upsilon fififl\Psi \Psi \Sigma \Sigma ffi\Xi revisions to address their comments and what their reaction was.  Kristin said that DWR 

was aware of the revisions. DWR would have liked to have seen more of their suggestions adopted, but they could live with the revisions. There was no additional 
discussion on these revisions, and they were approved by consensus.  
Next, Jordan explained that the committee recommended several revisions to address the new nutrient modeling results. The committee had reviewed the new results and the 
explanation of the results in Sections 3 and 5 of the plan.  The committee discussed several concerns about the model calibration, assumptions, and inputs.  The committee 
recommends the following revisions to address these concerns:  

ffl  Page 3-10: Add the following as new 3rd paragraph under Nutrient Modeling: 

ij`' ^*_*,ssae oe','sso/'AE OE`' aeO/' O/*AE !O/OE'oe"`'AE #*AE'ae oe'"_aeOE" aeO/OE' ss* OE`'planning process, but in its review of the models and their results, the 

Council had several concerns about the model assumptions and inputs. See Section 7.4 for a recommendation relate

AE OE* OE`' ^*_*,ssae$" ,**,'oe*"
O/%*_OE OE`' aeO/' O/*AE !O/OE'oe"`'AE #*AE'ae"&' 
ffl  Add the same paragraph on page 5-4 after 2nd paragraph in Section 5.3 
ffl  Add the following as a new information item in Section 7.4: 

ij`' ^*_*,ssae oe',*##'*AE" O/ (''oe oe'o/ss'! *) OE`' aeO/' O/*AE !O/OE'oe"hed water quality assessment models to better understand the methodology as it 

relates to the output and calibration. Pending the review, the council recommends that the model outputs not be utilized for setting water 
quality standards in-stream or for any other regulatory purposes 
ss*,ae_AEss** (*ss*OE "*_oe,' ('oe#ssOEOEss** ss* OE`' oe'*ss**&'  

Committee member Brant Keller commented that the model needs to be improved before it is used for permitting. Cliff Arnett commented that the peer review of the model is 
recommen+\Sigma +, -\Omega fl\Xi  \Pi \Sigma ff\Upsilon fifi\Sigma .+\Lambda \Psi fl\Upsilon . fl\Xi  \Xi flfifl/\Lambda \Pi  \Psi \Upsilon  \Psi \Omega \Sigma  0\Upsilon 1.fffl/ffi\Xi  \Pi \Sigma ff\Upsilon fifi\Sigma .+\Lambda \Psi fl\Upsilon . \Upsilon . \Psi \Omega \Sigma Water Quantity models, but it goes a bit further in that it recommends that the model 
results not be used before further review. Arnett confirmed that this is true.  
Chairman Chase asked Tim Cash (EPD) to comment on the proposed revisions.  Cash said that peer review is a process that is standard for research, but he has some concerns 
about how it would be implemented in this situation.   
The Chairman asked for a vote to assess support for this proposal from the committee. 
234 56789:; !==?6?4@ A34 96BB:AA44CD ?496BB48@4@ ?4?:D:68D ?4;!A4@ A6 87A?:48Amodeling by unanimous vote.  

  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 Jordan explained that Forrest Hill with the Two Rivers RC&D will explain a 319 grant 

proposal. This proposal would be eligible for a pool of funds set aside by EPD for Council identified 319 projects (nonpoint source).  A summary of the project is included 
on pages 39-41 of pre-meeting packet.  Forrest Hill distributed copies of the full proposal as a hand-out. 
 Forrest Hill explained the project, which will improve dirt and gravel roads in the Upper 
Flint Region to control sedimentation. The project targets dirt and gravel roads crossing TMDL listed streams in the region.  Ten priorities are identified, although other roads can 
be improved after the needs of the priority targets are addressed. Implementation will include both structural and non-structural Best Management Practices (BMPs). Hill asked 
for the assistance of Council members in site selection for the project.  The project will also provide training for local officials across the state in the Better Back Roads BMPs 
developed by Two Rivers RC&D.  
Brant Keller asked about monitoring requirements for the project. Hill explained that EPD had approved of the project approach; monitoring requirements are limited because 
the practices to be used are well understood. Cliff Arnett asked if future maintenance would be required of participating local governments. Hill said that 3 years of 
maintenance is required, but in his experience, counties will keep the maintenance up for much longer. Vice-chairman Morrow said that he had learned a lot from Two Rivers 
through the Better Back Roads program and that counties should use the Better Back Roads manual as a practical guide.  
 Raines Jordan said the committee recommends that the Council send a letter of support 
for this proposal.  A sample letter of support was distributed as a hand-out. This letter is necessary for the proposal to be eligible for the special pool of funds. The Council 
approved supporting the proposal by consensus.  
 Plan Review Committee Report 
 The Plan Review Committee met on March 29, 2011.  A meeting summary is included as 
pages 42-46 of the pre-meeting packet. The committee reviewed the March 8th review draft of the plan and d

\Gamma \Delta \Gamma \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Gamma \Pi  \Sigma \Gamma \Upsilon \Lambda \Phi \Phi \Gamma \Psi \Pi \Omega fffi\Lambda \Psi fl ff\Lambda  ffi\Lambda ffl\Psi \Upsilon fi\Theta  i\Lambda \Sigma  ff\Lambda \Pi \Omega j`fl \Phi \Gamma \Gamma fffi\Psi '. Chairman Chase gave the committee report. 

 First, the committee noted that the Water Quality Committee had suggested re-ordering 
management practices so that the top priority practices are at top of each section in Table 6-1.  The April 7th review draft reflects this revision; priorities were selected based on the 
survey conducted at the last Council meeting.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 Next, Chase said that the committee recommended modifying its recommendation on the 

future of the councils as follows (Section 7.4):   

The Council recommends that the General Assembly legislate authority to the Regional Water Councils, including the Upper Flint Council, to manage, plan and 
provide oversight of water resources within each region around the State. Funding should be provided to the Councils from State appropriations.  Revenue 
raising authority should be considered for these councils (similar to the Metro North Georgia Water District).  All funding raised should be used to provide for 
the coordination and implementation of the regional and state water plans and for studies, assessments and future plan updates within the respective regions. 
 Council member Randy Starling said that he was concerned about granting revenue 
raising authority to each Regional Water Council. Vice-Chairman Morrow said that the state uses this type of authority with good success, and these authorities have 
accountability to elected officials. Chairman Chase said this was an effort assert local 
\Gamma \Delta \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Delta \Pi  \Delta \Sigma \Upsilon \Xi  \Phi \Psi \Lambda \Psi \Xi \Upsilon  \Omega ff\Theta fffi\Upsilon \Omega \Upsilon \Theta \Lambda  \Delta \Phi  \Delta \Psi \Xi  \Xi \Upsilon fifl\Delta \Theta ffiffl iff\Lambda \Upsilon \Xi  \Xi \Upsilon ffl\Delta \Psi \Xi \Gamma \Upsilon fflj   

Starling said he does not support the language about revenue raising authority for the regional councils.  Raines Jordan expressed support for a regional water authority. 
Michael Beres noted that any funding raised should stay in the region. Beres suggested that the sentence regarding revenue\Xi ffflfflfl\Theta fi ffl`\Delta \Psi \Pi ' ^\Upsilon  '\Upsilon \Pi \Upsilon \Lambda \Upsilon ' ff\Phi \Lambda \Upsilon \Xi  *_\Lambda ff\Lambda \Upsilon  ff**\Xi \Delta *\Xi flff\Lambda fl\Delta \Theta ffl,j  

Lamar Perlis said that funding would be important to administer and continue our efforts. Morrow suggested a user fee for water as a revenue source. 
 Chairman Chase said this is a pivotal issue for the council. He sees it in terms of whether 
the region does its own planning or allows the state to plan for it. Lamar Perlis said he would rather have control here in the region. Raines Jordan said that we need new ideas 
and thinking for water, and we cannot implement without funding.  Brant Keller expressed a preference for local control. He said that he does not mind paying money to a 
local authority if it provides for local control. Buddy Leger also expressed support for local control. Arnold reminded the Council that this was still simply a recommendation; 
we do not know what the legislature is going to do.  
There was some discussion about how the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District is funded.  Tim Cash (EPD) said the Metro District receives $200,000 from the 
state each year for planning; the rest was raised from regional funding. Beres noted that any money raised stays in the region.  
 After further discussion, Chairman Chase suggested the following revision to address the 
concerns raised:   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 13  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
  

The Council recommends that the General Assembly legislate authority to the Regional Water Councils, including the Upper Flint Council, to manage, plan and 
provide oversight of water resources within each region around the State. Funding should be provided to the Councils from State appropriations.  Revenue 
raising authority should be considered for these councils (similar to the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District). Funding raised should be 
used to provide for coordination and implementation of regional and state water plans and for studies, assessments and future plan updates within the respective 
regions.  
This proposed revision was approved by consensus.  
Next, \Gamma \Delta \Theta  \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Pi \Sigma \Gamma \Gamma \Theta \Theta \Upsilon \Phi  \Psi \Theta \Lambda \Xi \Pi \Pi \Theta \Omega fffi\Gamma \Sigma \Xi \Omega  fl\Xi \Psi  fi \Omega \Theta ffi \Sigma \Gamma \Theta \Pi  ffl\Omega ff\Theta \Psi  ifi\Gamma \Theta \Psi  j\Xi `\Sigma \Lambda 'Recommendations (Section 7.4) was reviewed (as presented in the April 7th draft): 
  The Council urges the State to seek a timely resolution of current interstate water 

issues that directly affect the Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint Basin. The Council recommends the development of a tri-state framework designed to 
address interstate water issues in the future and the inclusion of the Regional Water Councils within this framework.  
 This proposal was approved by consensus. 
 Next, it was noted that the committee recommended moving management practice 
(formerly) WQ5 to this section as a recommendation because its purview was broader than water quality.  It is presented in Section 7.4 in the April 7th review draft, as follows:  
  The Council recommends continued coordination and cooperation among 

neighboring water councils. The Upper Flint Council has worked closely with the Middle Chattahoochee and Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Councils, and our joint 
efforts will benefit our regions and the state as a whole.   
This proposal was approved by consensus.  
 Local Elected Officials and Public Comments 
Next, the Council provided time for local elected officials and the general public to address the council, but no one indicated that they would like to speak.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 14  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
  

Final Discussion of Plan for Submittal to EPD  
Kristin asked the Council if there were any more issues to discuss before approval of the plan for submittal to EPD. 
 Vice-Chairman Morrow reminded the Council of the importance of education about the 
plan. He discussed how Brant Keller provides water education programs for 5th and 6th graders in Griffin. 
 Chairman Chase said that the Council needs to defend this plan. He said that we were all 
in this together, and the Council members need to be advocates for the plan. Beth English reminded the Council that it will be important to work with the legislature. 
 Brant Keller said it would be good to have a PowerPoint presentation about the plan to 
support education efforts.  Steve Simpson said the executive summary would be a good hand-out.  Kristin Rowles said she had some slides that she had recently compiled for 
Cliff Arnett to conduct a program on the plan.  These could be adapted for future presentations. 
 Adoption of Plan for Submittal to EPD 
 Chairman Chase asked for any more discussion of the plan. There was no further 
discussion.  He asked the Council members to stand to indicate their support for adoption of this plan, as modified today, for submittal as the recommended plan to EPD by May 
2nd.  All of the Council members stood to indicate their support and approve the plan by consensus. 
 The Council adjourned. 

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 15  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 18, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 14, 2011 
 Attachment 1:  

Upper Flint Water Planning Council  Council Meeting Attendance 

\Gamma  April 14, 2011  

Council Members  
Clifford Arnett Hays Arnold 
Mike Beres Michael Bowens 
Gene Brunson Donald Chase 
Mike Donnelly Beth English 
Harold Fallin Jack Holbrook 

Raines Jordan Frank Keller 
Brant Keller Buddy Leger 
Dick Morrow Lamar Perlis 
Gary Powell Charles Rucks 
Bill Sawyer Randall Starling 
  

Council Members Not In Attendance  Greg Barineau 
Tommy Burnsed William Culpepper 
Eddie Freeman 

George Hooks Lynmore James 
Jim Reid Joel Wood
 Planning Consultants    
Steve Simpson, B&V Robert Osborne, B&V  Mark Masters, GWPPC Kristin Rowles, GWPPC  
 Georgia EPD  
Bill Morris Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  

  
   Robert Osborne 38 9 14 10 4 111 2 129 1 EDT NA MEETING MINUTES UFL_CM10_Summary.pdf en  