

B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.3  

May 11, 2009  
 To:    Upper Flint Water Planning Council 
 From:    Kristin Rowles, GWPPC and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch 
 cc:     Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD 
 Subject:   Meeting Summary: Upper Flint Water Council Meeting on May 1, 2009 
  
The council meeting was held on May 1, 2009 at the City of Griffin's Municipal Court Room at One Griffin Center.  The list of attendees is attached.  Steve Simpson, planning consultant 
project manager, briefly introduced the planning consultant team.  
Welcome and Introductions / Approve Agenda  
Council member Mayor Dick Morrow welcomed the council to the City of Griffin.  Kristin Rowles, planning consultant facilitator, welcomed the council members.  After each council 
member briefly introduced themselves, Kristin asked state agency members in attendance to introduce themselves.  Kristin then reviewed the agenda, which included: 
 

\Gamma   Understanding our commitments and obligations 
\Gamma   How we will move forward: the planning process and timelines 
\Gamma   The story of water in our region: Trends, forces, and factors influencing the future of water 

\Gamma   Governance: Who will lead?  
The council members did not request any changes to the agenda.   
Kristin noted that we all are bringing different types and levels of knowledge to this process and that the early part of the process would be about helping each other learn what we need to know 
in order to prepare the regional plan. Kristin indicated that a sign-up sheet was available for those wishing to make comments during the local government official and public comment 
sections of the meeting and that those wishing to submit written comments could do so with materials available at the registration table. She also noted that questions that could not be 
answered during the meeting would be noted on a "parking lot" flip chart for follow-up by the planning consultants.  
 Recap Water Planning Councils Kickoff Meeting 
 Kristin briefly reviewed the Kickoff Meeting of March 13, 2009 and asked the Council if they 
had any questions or comments.  The following questions were asked:  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 
 

\Gamma   Why does Atlanta have no regional water planning council?  Steve explained that a separate water planning process exists for the metropolitan Atlanta area, as the Metro 

North Georgia district was created by separate legislation in 2001.  The district prepared drinking water, wastewater, and watershed plans in 2003.  These plans have recently been 
updated and the updates are currently being finalized.  This information is available online at the district's website.  Senator Hooks advised that the Metro North Georgia 
district is ahead of the regional water councils in developing plans. 
\Gamma   How will Georgia's Water Conservation Implementation Plan (WCIP) affect our planning process?  Kristin noted that the development of the WCIP was on-going and that 

a new document addressing public comments is due out soon.  She noted that more information on this process would be relevant to our work and could be provided to the 
Council members as that process develops further.  Brant Keller and Cliff Arnett noted concern over the scheduled development of water conservation rules by December 2009, 
prior to the completion of the regional plans. 
\Gamma   How much weight will our plan have?  What will be the result of our work?  What options are open to us?  How much flexibility in plan creation do we have?  Kristin 

briefly explained the plan process and outcomes, including the importance of the plan to EPD permitting and GEFA loan and grant program implementation. She also noted that 
we would be discussing the planning process in more detail in the afternoon.  Tim Cash advised that the Council was not expected to "rubber stamp" a plan created by EPD. 
Senator Hooks added that the intent of the state water planning process is for the plans to be developed with local input with guidance from EPD. 
 MOA, Operating Procedures, and Rules for Meetings 
 The next section of the agenda dealt with the Memorandum of Agreement, Operating Procedures 
and Rules for Meetings. Kristin noted that we would start with a presentation of the MOA by the Environmental Protection Division (EPD). She indicated that the MOA itself is largely derived 
from existing state policy and the statewide water plan, and therefore, not really open to negotiation. However, the operating procedures and rules for meetings are open to discussion, 
and we will discuss them today, after the presentation.   
Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief for EPD, outlined to the Council key roles and responsibilities for each of the parties in the MOA. The parties to the MOA are the Georgia Environmental 
Protection Division, the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and the Council members. Tim emphasized that the MOA was not a contract, but an agreement to participate.  The MOA 
was developed based on existing state policy and the statewide water plan.   
These two documents were designed to help guide the Councils through the water planning process. Tim stated that today would be spent identifying desired changes to the Operating 
Procedures and Rules for Meetings.  Tim said that EPD would provide feedback on these  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 
changes with the hope that the Council could finalize the documents and sign the MOA at the next Council Meeting. 
 After Tim's presentation, the Council had the following questions and comments: 

\Gamma   What is the role of alternate members when they are not needed for a quorum? 
\Gamma   Does consensus mean 100%? 
\Gamma   Does the MOA agreement mean we are being asked to just simply accept the  EPD reports/forecasts? Tim agreed we are asking the council to trust the process, but pointed 

out the council members will have lots opportunities for input. 
\Gamma   It would be helpful to have a template for final product?  It was noted that the planning guidance will provide more in-depth guidance of how the plan should be developed and 

what it will look like and that the executive summary of the guidance document  in the packet has a plan template. 
\Gamma   How much interaction will we have with the Lower Flint Water Council?  Tim pointed out that there will be joint meetings with adjacent councils as necessary, including the 

Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council. 
\Gamma   How much will Council input affect the forecasts?  Tim stated that the council will have opportunities to review and comment on the forecasts. 

\Gamma   Will the forecasts incorporate the current economic conditions? 
\Gamma   How much flexibility will we have to depart from the EPD template? 
\Gamma   How will interstate issues with neighboring states affect us? 
\Gamma   Is there sufficient flexibility in the MOA to adapt during the planning process? 
\Gamma   What are the roles of EPD and the Council in relation to each other? How will EPD and Council disagreements be resolved? 

 These questions were recorded on a flip chart, so these can be reviewed by EPD and planning 
consultant and addressed definitively at the next Council Meeting. Kristin noted the availability of a template for the regional water conservation and development plan in the notebooks from 
the Kick-off Meeting. For additional information that would address questions about the process, she also referred members to the executive summary of the planning guidance that was included 
in the pre-meeting packet.  
Next, Kristin noted that the Operating Procedures emphasize the use of consensus-based decision making. She said consensus means different things to different people, and that it was important 
to discuss the idea as a group in order to determine what it means and how it might work for the Council. She passed out a handout titled "Achieving Results through Consensus Decision 
Making" to guide small group discussion. . She noted that this discussion would lay a foundation for review of the Operating Procedures and Rules for Meetings.  She divided the council 
members into 5 groups to work through the handout. After the groups were finished, Kristin asked each group what they thought of the consensus process described in the worksheet. Could 
they use it?  What were its advantages and disadvantages?  Council members had the following responses:  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 
 

\Gamma   One group noted that a 100% vote on all issues was unrealistic, so voting called by the chair is necessary.  This group was suggested that a simple majority be the standard for 

decisions about changing the rules, but that a two-thirds vote for issues would be a good target. 
\Gamma   One group noted that consensus was a good for guiding discussion but a two-thirds vote would be needed for decisions. Several said that the chair would have to decide when to 

call for a vote in lieu of trying to reach consensus. Several members indicated preference for a two-thirds majority vote over 100% consensus. One indicated that a two-thirds 
majority might be considered a fairly good measure of consensus.  
\Gamma   One group noted that the consensus process outlined could work, but they wanted to be sure that any concerns or dissent would be documented. A two-thirds vote would be a 

good fallback in lieu of consensus.  If less than two-thirds agreement, the Chair could appoint a committee to study the issue further and develop consensus, defined as "no 
kicking and screaming". 
\Gamma   One group highlighted the issue of how to count a two-thirds majority. Some felt that it should be two-thirds of all 25 members instead of two-thirds of the quorum. One member 

commented that two-thirds majority might not be a realistic standard to achieve in some cases.  
\Gamma   One group advised that what was important was the attitude that the council members brought to the process; "heartburn" does not mean consensus is not reached.  The 

importance of selecting a chair was highlighted. 
\Gamma   The importance of documenting dissent and disagreement when decisions are recorded was noted as important by several members. 

 A council member asked if all the councils will have the same operating procedures. Tim noted 
that while all councils will not have the exact same operating procedures, there will be need to be some consistency among the councils.   EPD will review input from the councils after the first 
round of council meetings is completed (mid-May).  
Next, Kristin turned the focus to the Operating Procedures and Rules for Meetings. She indicated our discussion should focus on what works and what needs attention. She said as we consider 
changes, we should keep in mind what EPD will be looking for as they consider changes: how changes will improve the process for the Regional Council.  Kristin separated the council 
members again into the same small groups and gave each group the "Operating Procedures/Rules for Meetings Broad Issue Areas" Small Group worksheet. The groups reported back with the 
following suggestions:  

\Gamma   Several groups commented on the term for the Chair. One group felt that the six-month term was acceptable, since the operating procedures do not specify that a new chair had 

to be elected (i.e. the council could elect the same chair).  Two other groups suggested changing the six-month term of the Chair and Vice-Chair to at least a one-year term.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 

Several members felt that six-months would not be a long enough term to get on top of the issues. Some noted that the rules should allow for change if the chair is not working 
out (e.g., by two-thirds vote to remove chair). 
\Gamma   One group asked whether quarterly meetings, as suggested in the Operating Procedures (Sect. V), would be enough; the suggestion was to edit the language to say "minimum". 

\Gamma   One group suggested that Amendments to the Operating Procedures and Rules for Meetings (Sect. VIII of the Operating Procedures) should be able to be changed with a 

simple majority vote instead of a two-thirds majority vote. At least one member disagreed and felt that the two-thirds majority standard should be used to make amendments. 
\Gamma   One group asked for clarification of how the total membership should be counted. They suggested that the quorum and voting be based on the 25 appointed members, whether or 

not present (ex-officio and alternates are nonvoting unless the alternates are needed to establish a quorum).  Therefore, two-thirds of the 25 members would be 17; there was 
some concern noted that this might be too high to get work done. 
\Gamma   One group suggested that non-member participation and rules for special discussion (Sect VI of the Operating Procedures) should be by two-thirds majority vote instead of at the 

discretion of the Chair, as there was concern about the chair potentially using this discretion to minimize desired discussion.  
\Gamma   One group suggested that for meetings agenda (Rules for Meetings, Rule 4) that time limits be added to the agenda and that the agenda include sections for additional items as 

desired by Council members and discussion of the next meeting's agenda. 
\Gamma   For decision-making (Rules for Meetings, Rule 6.I) one group suggested that written ballots not be used by the Council. They felt that all votes should be public votes. 

\Gamma   For public notice of meetings (Rules for Meetings, Rule 7.A), one group noted that public notice for meetings should be per state law.  They felt that meeting advertising provisions 

were adequate, but questioned if notices had to be in every county.  Clarification is needed from EPD. 
\Gamma   For public comment (Rules for Meetings, Rule 7.B), one group suggested that the Chair should be given discretion to put time limits on comments and to provide for rebuttal. 
\Gamma   One group noted a preference for the use of Robert's Rules of Order due to general familiarity with their use. 
\Gamma   One member asked that the procedures/rules indicate that the agenda should be available prior to the meeting.  One member asked for clarification on whether the Council can 

meet without consultants and EPD due to concern over amount of work and recognition of limited budgets. 
\Gamma   One group suggested having multiple Vice-Chairs. 
\Gamma   One group asked for more explanation on the formation of subcommittees. 
\Gamma   One member noted that consistency with other councils is important. 
\Gamma   Several members suggested that the number of people from one organization speaking may need to be limited in the interests of time, and emphasized that all major meeting 

items need to be on the agenda prior to the meeting.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 
Kristin facilitated discussion of the Council's suggestions.  The suggestions, comments, and questions will be provided to EPD to seek feedback and clarification.  Potential changes to 
address the concerns raised will be discussed at the next Council meeting.  
One Council member asked that R.S.V.P.s be counted in advance for each meeting and that the members be notified if it is clear that a quorum will not be able to attend so that the meeting can 
be rescheduled and members can avoid traveling to a meeting where a quorum will not be present.  
 Next, Kristin reviewed the roles for the Chair and Vice-Chair, as described in the Operating 
Procedures. She noted that the election of the Chair and Vice-Chair would be held in the afternoon and that nominations could be made on the flip chart or by turning in a notecard at the 
registration table.  
Lunch/Virtual Tour of Griffin  
During lunch, Dr. Brant Keller, council member, gave a presentation of the City of Griffin's water resource management programs. 
 Present Website Capabilities 
 Robert Osborne, planning consultant team member, gave a presentation on the present website 
capabilities.  He demonstrated how to find council information and other water planning resources at the Georgia water planning portal site (http://www.georgiawaterplanning.org).   
 Robert indicated that EPD would soon have a new site design which will make finding 
information easier. He showed a demonstration snapshot of this site. He noted that the Upper Flint Water Planning Council will have its own website that will be accessible from main portal 
site.  The address for this site will be: http://www.UpperFlint.org  
Regional Geography, Facilities and Resources Overview  
Steve presented an overview of water resources for the Upper Flint region.  Steve handed out a copy of Upper Flint Water Planning Region's Resources Map to each council member. The 
presentation included a summary of the following:   

\Gamma   Census and population breakdowns 
\Gamma   Wildlife resources  
\Gamma   Impaired waters/ total maximum daily loads 
\Gamma   Power plants 
\Gamma   Permitted water use in the Region 
\Gamma   2005 water withdrawal breakdowns for the Upper Flint  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009  
Steve noted that a county by county breakdown of water use, NPDES permits, and storm water was included in the presentation, but in the interest of keeping on schedule, he would not review 
every county. Steve noted a copy of this presentation will be posted on the website along with other material from today's presentation. One member asked for more information on water use 
by power generating facilities, including nuclear power plants.  Steve advised that nuclear power plants may use more or less water than other types of power plants, depending on size, type of 
cooling system, and other factors.  A presentation on power plant water use will be considered for a future Council meeting.   
 What Needs to be Accomplished: Process, Timeline, and Report Outline 
 Kristin gave an overview of the planning process and explained each of the components of the 
figure below and also discussed the timeline for the planning process. 

  
 Trends, Forces, and Factors that will Affect the Future of Water in the Region / 

Implications of Trends for the Region and Regional Plan  
Kristin said that the next part of the agenda would focus on collecting information from the members and beginning to lay the foundation on which to develop our learning process.  Kristin 
asked each person to generate some idea on what are the trends, forces, and factors that will be 

  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 
affecting the future of water in our region.  She asked them to include social, technological, economic, environmental, and political factors.  Next, Kristin asked council members to share 
their ideas which were written on the flip charts for members to view.  The ideas were then arranged or clumped by a group of Council members. Then, Kristin worked with the Council to 
name each of the groups. The results were as follows:   

\Gamma   Conservation: Needed, Increasing, but Uncertain 

o  Water conservation increasing 
o  Consumptive water use will get worse 
o  Hard to tell if conservation is long-term 
o  More closed-loop processing in industry 
o  Less per capita water use 
o  Increasing awareness of water use  

\Gamma   Uncertainty about future water demand 

o  Loss of traditional industry and increase of lower water use industry 
o  Increasing demand 
o  Military base getting bigger 
o  Population increase will increase demand for power and water  

\Gamma   Agriculture: More efficient irrigation but uncertainty about future water demand for agriculture 

o  Phasing out smaller farms (non-irrigated) in lieu of irrigated 
o  More vegetable crops, requiring higher water use 
o  Irrigation becoming more technically advanced 
o  Increasing efficiency for irrigation water use 
o  Increased demand for irrigation 
o  Using less water to grow more plants   

\Gamma   Forest land use changing: 

o  Reduction in forest - what will be that land be used for? 
o  Large tree farms decreasing, number of smaller tree farms increasing    

\Gamma   Water utilities: Regionalizing? 

o  Too many utilities that are too small 
o  Trend toward regionalization  

\Gamma   Interbasin Transfers May Increase 

o  Interbasin transfers may increase 
o  Increased demand north of Upper Flint will increase pressure for interbasin transfer 

o  Underutilizing the resources in our region  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 
 

\Gamma   Near-term Climate Uncertainty 

o  Drought conditions? 
o  More rainfall?  

\Gamma   Increasing use of land application and on-site treatment/concern about wastewater returns 

o  Trend toward land application reduces downstream flow 
o  Increased onsite treatment  

\Gamma   Political Constraints 

o  Legislature restricting local government actions 
o  Tri-State Water War Issues  

\Gamma   Concern about the Future 

o  Concern for future generations 
o  Counties north of us have had loss of quality of life  

\Gamma   Budget Uncertain 

o  State budget projections decreasing 
o  Money availability for "green energy" results in development pressure  

With help from the Council and the posted ideas, Kristin guided the group toward developing a "story" for the region's water resources. The main theme is that uncertainty over a number of 
factors (e.g., political, economic, climate) looms over our efforts to develop a water plan for this region. We will have to collect information to address these uncertainties to the extent possible 
and develop our plan with these uncertainties in mind to accommodate potential changes in the future.   
 Introduction to Population and Employment Forecasts 
 Kristin provided an introduction to the forthcoming Population and Employment forecasts.  First 
she provided an overview of population and employment trends in Georgia, and then she explained the methodology that is being used to forecast population and employment for the 
region.  The population and employment forecasts will help to determine future water and wastewater needs for the region.  The presentation slides will be available on the website.  
Kristin explained that the Population and Employment forecasts would be shared with local governments in the region, along with an invitation to participate in the Local Government 
Advisory body for the Council.  Kristin noted that the Council's roles with respect to the Population and Employment forecasts would be: (1) understand the background information and 
methods; (2) review the forecasts that they will receive later this month; (3) encourage local  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 10  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 
governments to submit comments; and (4) discuss the forecasts at the Council's next meeting (June).  After the presentation, the council members asked the following questions: 
 

\Gamma   How will the 2010 census affect our work? Kristin noted that the 2010 census data would probably not be available before our plan is complete. 

\Gamma   How will the current recession affection projections for population & employment? 
\Gamma   Would all four alternatives be roughly the same? Kristin agreed that in this region it is possible that there might not be a tremendous range.  

\Gamma   Will there be information on the level of accuracy for these statistical methods?  Kristin said yes. 
\Gamma   Are they looking at demographic shifts such as Florida retirees?  Kristin noted that the methods should be able to measure that if it appears in the 1990-2000 or 2000-2007 

data.  However, she also noted that this type of input from the council members will be very helpful in reviewing and commenting on the population and employment forecasts. 
 Election of Chair and Vice-Chair 
 Council members Chair nominated Donald Chase, Dick Morrow, and Randall Starling for the 
Chair position.  Randall Starling withdrew his nomination.  Donald Chase and Dick Morrow both spoke about the importance of the Council's work and their vision to support it if elected.  
Eligible council members were asked to vote by paper ballot.  After the ballots were collected and counted, the results were as follows: 
 

\Gamma   11 for Donald Chase 
\Gamma   10 for Dick Morrow  

Donald Chase was named Chair with Dick Morrow named as Vice-Chair.  Donald Chase thanked the Council. 
 Local Elected Officials and Public Comments 
 Kristen invited local elected officials and the general public to address the council.  There were 
no local elected officials who spoke.  Two members of the general public spoke to the Council: Shana Udvardy, Georgia Conservancy, and Patti Lanford, Georgia Wildlife Resources Division.  
 Wrap-Up and What to Expect Next Meeting 
 After reviewing several dates for the next council meeting, it was agreed that Friday, June 26, 
2009, would be date for the next Council meeting.  Kip Purvis suggested that the meeting be held in Warm Springs at the community center.  Several council members suggested starting the 
meeting an hour later to allow for travel time.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 
Action List/(Responsibility)  

\Delta   Provide Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning Executive Summaries of plan updates. (Planning Consultant) 
\Delta   Provide additional information on Georgia's Water Conservation Implementation Plan (Planning Consultant and EPD)   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 1  May 11, 2009 
Meeting Date: May 1, 2009 

 

Attachment 1: Upper Flint Water Planning Council 
Council Meeting Attendance - May 1, 2009  
Council Members Clifford J. Arnett 
Hays Arnold Michael Beres 
Michael Bowens Gene Brunson 
Donald G. Chase William Culpepper 
Beth English Harold Fallin 
William Wilson (representing Eddie L. Freeman) 
Jack Holbrook (Alternate) Sen. George Hooks (Ex-Officio) 
Terrell Hudson D. Raines Jordan 
Frank Keller Brant D. Keller, PhD (Alternate) 
Charles "Buddy" Leger Dick Morrow 
Lamar J. Perlis (Alternate) Gary Powell 
Robert "Kip" Purvis Jim C. Reid 
Charles C. Rucks William "Bill" Sawyer 
Randall L. Starling Benjamin "Joel" Wood 
 Council Members Not In Attendance 
James G. Barineau Thomas R. Burnsed 
Mike J. Donnelly Lynmore James (Ex-Officio) 

 Georgia EPD 
Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief Brian Baker 
Rob McDowell, Assistant Branch Chief    
Planning Consultants Robert Osborne, Black & Veatch 
Kristin Rowles, GWPPC Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  Robert Osborne 38 21 17 14 4 109 4 133 1  -14400 MEETING MINUTES  UFL_CM1_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 8.1 for Word 